WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 20TH,
TWENTY TWENTY THREE ELECTRON
MEETING OF THE UNABRIDGED
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION THIS
MEETING IS BEING ELECTRONICALLY
BUT WE INTEND TO CONDUCT IT
SIMILARLY TO AN IN-PERSON
MEETING.
PUBLIC COMMENT WILL BE VIA
TELEPHONE OR ZOOME ONLY TO
SPEAK DURING ANY OF THE PUBLIC
COMMENT OPPORTUNITIES.
PLEASE CALL TWO ZERO SIX THREE
THREE SEVEN NINE SEVEN TWO
THREE AND THEN A MEETING I'D
NUMBER NINE THREE FOUR SIX
THREE EIGHT FIVE TWO NINE ZERO
SEVEN WE'RE JOINED VIA THE
ZOOME LIKE THIS INFORMATION IS
ALSO AVAILABLE PUBLISHED AGENDA
IN THE PUBLIC NOTICES SECTION
OF THE CITY WEBSITE AND ON THE
BROADCAST OF THIS MEETING ON
C10 CHANNEL 16.
SO RAYMOND, IF YOU DO YES
INDEED SO I WILL NOW CALL RULE
.
I HAVE RECEIVED REGRET'S FROM
COUNCIL MEMBER ACKMANN AS WELL
AS COMMISSIONER MARGOLIS WHO
WILL NOT BE ABLE TO ATTEND AND
THEN AS A REMINDER WE SAY HERE
AND FROM WHERE YOU ARE DIALING
IN FROM WHEN YOUR NAME IS
CALLED COMMISSIONER BOLAND HERE
FROM ANN ARBOR, MICHIGAN ROVEN
HERE FROM ANN ARBOR MENTIONER
HOW TO MACCHI HERE FROM ANN
ARBOR MENTIONER HALK HEAR FROM
ARBOR COMMISSIONER KEYLA
COMMISSIONER KLEINMAN HERE FROM
ANN ARBOR MISSIONER LEE HERE
FROM ANN ARBOR, COMMISSIONER
CARPENTER HERE FROM SUPERIOR
TOWNSHIP MICHIGAN.
>> RAMASWAMY COMMISSIONER HAS
HERE FROM ANN ARBOR,
COMMISSIONER HUTCHINSON HERE
FROM ANN ARBOR, LIEUTENANT MIKE
SHERVON HERE FROM TYRONE
TOWNSHIP AND COMMISSIONER STUKA
ABSENCE AS WELL.
>> ALL RIGHT.
WE DO HAVE ONE ALL RIGHT.
>> THANK YOU.
THERE ARE TWO ITEMS ON THE
AGENDA TODAY APPROVAL OF THE
AGENDA AND APPROVAL OF THE
MINUTES.
ARE THERE ANY MODIFICATIONS TO
THE CONSENT AGENDA SEEING NONE?
>> IS THERE A MOTION TO APPROVE
THE CONSENT AGENDA AS PRESENTED
SO MOVED BY MOLLY SECONDED BY
ALL THOSE IN FAVOR OF THE
MOTION PLEASE SAY YES OR RAISE
YOUR HAND.
YES, ALL THOSE OPPOSED PLEASE
SAY NO OR RAISING OR THE
CONSENT PROOF.
NOW WE MOVE ON TO THE PUBLIC
COMMENTS SECTION AND THIS IS AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR PERSONS TO
SPEAK FOR UP TO THREE MINUTES
AGAIN PLEASE CALL TO ZERO SIX
THREE THREE SEVEN NINE SEVEN
TWO THREE AND A MEETING OF THE
NUMBER NINE THREE FOUR SIX
THREE EIGHT FIVE TWO NINE ZERO
SEVEN OR CONNECT WE ASSUME AS
DESCRIBED ON THE AGENDA CITY
STAFF WAS SELECT COLORS THAT
HAVE RAISED THEIR HAND ONE BY
ONE USING THE LAST THREE DIGITS
OF YOUR PHONE NUMBER OR THE
PERSON'S ID IN ORDER TO
ELECTRONICALLY RAISE YOUR HAND
TO INDICATE YOUR DESIRE TO
SPEAK PLEASE PRESS STAR NINE ON
YOUR PHONE OR SELECT THE RAISED
HAND BUTTON AND YOU'LL HEAR AN
AUTOMATED ANNOUNCEMENT THAT THE
HOST IS ALLOWING YOU TO SPEAK
WHEN SPEAKING.
PLEASE INTO A QUIET AREA OF ANY
TELEVISION ON SOUND SO THAT WE
MAY HEAR YOU CLEARLY.
PLEASE STATE YOUR NAME AT THE
BEGINNING OF YOUR COMMENTS
RAYMOND.
HAVE ANY MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC
WHO WISH TO SPEAK?
WE DO.
I HAVE RACHEL JACOBSON WITH
THEIR HAND UP RACHEL UNMUTED
YOU AND THE FLOOR IS YOURS.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
AND THIS IS RACHEL JACOBSON AND
I AM HERE WITH WHAT'S YOUR
NAME?
I GET DALIA JACOBSON AND YARA
GOLDSTEIN.
SO OUR
FAMILY THE THREE OF US
PLUS ONE OTHER ADULT AND OUR
DOG LIVES SOUTH OF STADIUM
ALMOST EXACTLY AEQUITAS FROM
THE LIGHT AT PACARD AND THE
LIGHT AT SOUTH INDUSTRIAL.
OUR PRIMARY MODES
OF TRANSPORTATION ARE WALKING
AND BIKING AND WE FREQUENTLY
NEED TO CROSS STADIUM TO GET TO
FRIENDS' HOUSES PLACES
OF WORSHIP, STORES AND SHOPS
THAT WE FREQUENT.
IT'S NOT PRACTICAL FOR US TO
WALK A QUARTER OF A MILE OUT
OF OUR WAY SO WITH KIDS THAT
CAN BE FIVE TO TEN EXTRA
MINUTES OF WALKING TO CROSS
SAFELY ONE OF THE EXISTING
LIGHTS WE HAVE DISCUSSED THIS
ISSUE WITH MANY NEIGHBORHOOD
RESIDENTS WHO FACE THE SAME
CHALLENGE AND WE STRONGLY
RECOMMEND INSTALLING A MARKED
CROSSWALK WITH RECTANGULAR
RAPID FLASHING BEACON ACROSS
STADIUM CONNECTING IROQUOIS
FROM THE SOUTH AND FERNDALE
FROM THE NORTH.
THIS WOULD IMMENSELY INCREASE
PEDESTRIAN SAFETY.
ADDITIONALLY, WE WOULD LIKE TO
POINT OUT THAT STADIUM
REPRESENTS A DISTINCT DIVIDE
BETWEEN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
RESIDENTS WHO ARE ON AVERAGE
WEALTHIER IN BERN'S PARK AND A
NEIGHBORHOOD OF RESIDENTS WHO
ARE ON AVERAGE LESS WEALTHY.
BRYANT PATTENGALE SAVE
PEDESTRIAN FACILITIES
CONNECTING THESE TWO
NEIGHBORHOODS WILL SUPPORT THE
CITY OF ANN ARBOR SCHOOLS TO
FOSTER RELATIONSHIP BUILDING
AND EQUITY AMONG PEOPLE
OF DIFFERENT SOCIO
SOCIOECONOMIC CLASSES.
WE WOULD LIKE TO KNOW WHY THERE
IS NOT CURRENTLY A SAFE WAY TO
CROSS STADIUM IN BETWEEN
PACKARD AND S INDUSTRIAL
DESPITE MULTIPLE RESIDENTS
POSTING ABOUT THIS NEED ON SEE
QUICK FIX AND IN OTHER FORUMS
OVER THE PAST SEVERAL YEARS
WHAT IS REQUIRED TO INSTALL A
CROSSWALK IN BETWEEN THESE
LIGHTS?
WHAT THE TIME FRAME WOULD BE
FOR INSTALLING SAID CROSSWALK
AND WHAT WE CAN DO AS RESIDENTS
OF THE NEIGHBORHOOD TO ENSURE
THIS GETS DONE.
GETúLIO, DO YOU WANT TO SAY
ANYTHING ELSE
FROM MY
END YARD?
DO YOU WANT TO SAY ANYTHING
WHILE I WAS THERE?
>> NO CROSSWALK THANK
THANK YOU
VERY MUCH RACHEL AND COMPANY
SHARE THOSE COMMENTS.
I'M NOT SEEING ANY OTHER HANDS
RAISED AT THE MOMENT IF WE CAN
GIVE IT JUST A MOMENT AND SEE
IF ANY OTHER IT'S LIKE WE HAVE
KATHY GRISWOLD
.
YEAH.
YES VERY GOOD.
KATHY GRISWOLD I'VE GONE AHEAD
AND GIVE YOU PERMISSION TO TALK
TO HIM YOURSELF FROM THE FLOOR
IS YOURS.
>> OH OK.
THIS IS KATHY GRISWOLD AND I
JUST WANT TO STATE THAT MANY
YEARS AGO I MET WITH
ENGINEERING STAFF ALONG WITH
COUNCIL MEMBER JACK EATON AND
LOOKED AT THAT AREA ON STADIUM
NEAR IROQUOIS AND HAD REQUESTED
A A CROSSWALK THERE WITH THE
RFD.
SO MAYBE IT IS IN THE PLANS.
I'M NOT SURE BUT I JUST WANT TO
MENTION THAT I HAD THREE THINGS
TO TALK ABOUT.
FIRST ONE IS IT'S COME TO MY
ATTENTION BY A NUMBER OF PEOPLE
THAT S MAPLE AT DICKINS THREE
THERE ARE SCHOOL CHILDREN WHO
ARE CROSSING THERE AND IT'S NOT
DESIGNATED AS A SCHOOL CROSSING
AND IT'S EXTREMELY DANGEROUS
ACCORDING TO PEOPLE WHO ARE
WITNESSING THE CHILDREN
CROSSING BEAR NO TO KINGS
SCHOOL HAS FOUR CROSSWALKS ON
WILDWOOD AND PEMBERTON.
THEY'VE BEEN BROUGHT TO STAFF
ATTENTION THROUGH EIGHT TO FIX
IT REQUESTS THOSE FOR
CROSSWALKS WERE PUT IN ABOUT
FIFTY YEARS AGO.
THEY CONNECT PUBLIC WALKWAYS
GOING TO KING SCHOOL.
THEY DO NOT HAVE ADA RAMPS YET
THEY WERE BECAUSE THEY WERE PUT
IN BEFORE THE ADA A LAW AND
THAT WAS PASSED IN NINETEEN
NINETY.
SO THOSE DO NEED TO BE
ADDRESSED AND RIGHT NOW WHAT'S
HAPPENED IS ONE OF THE FOUR
CROSSWALK SIGNS HAS BEEN
REMOVED AND REPLACED WITH A
DIFFERENT KIND OF SIGN BUT THE
OTHER THREE ARE THE SAME SO WE
HAVE EVEN LESS CONSISTENCY THAN
WE DID BEFORE AND THE LAST
THING IS ABOUT LIGHTING.
I MENTIONED THIS AT COUNCIL
ACCORDING TO THE US DEPARTMENT
OF TRANSPORTATION THEY STATE
SAFETY BENEFITS POLAND LIGHTING
CAN REDUCE CRASHES UP TO FORTY
TWO PERCENT FOR NIGHTTIME
INJURY PIDF IN CRASHES AT
INTERSECTIONS.
SO I ASSUME THAT WOULD ALSO
APPLY TO OUR MIDDLER
CROSSWALKS.
SO VISION ZERO CALLS FOR US TO
BE PROACTIVE.
WE KNOW THAT LIGHTING WILL SAVE
LIVES TO MY KNOWLEDGE LIGHTING
DOES NOT HAVE A HOME WITHIN
CITY HALL.
IT DOESN'T SEEM TO BE UNDER THE
JURISDICTION OF THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION AND
WE REALLY NEED TO DECIDE WHAT
WE'RE GOING TO DO THERE BECAUSE
LIGHTING IS CRITICAL.
I WAS ALREADY AFTER DARK TODAY
AND THERE WERE RANDOM STREET
LIGHTS THAT WERE OUT AS WELL AS
A FEW THAT WERE NAVY BLUE ISH
AND I KNOW THE CITY IS AWARE
OF THAT BUT ANYWAY THEY'RE NOT
PUTTING OFF THE ILLUMINATION
THAT'S NEEDED.
SO THANKS FOR LISTENING TO ME
TONIGHT.
THANK YOU
.
ANYONE ELSE I WOULD LIKE TO
SPEAK PLEASE PLEASE RAISE YOUR
A OUTSING ANY ADDITIONAL HANDS
RAISED BREATH.
>> ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU TO ALL MEMBERS OF THE
PUBLIC FOR ATTENDING AND
SPEAKING THIS EVENING.
YOUR COMMENTS ARE VALUABLE TO
THE COMMISSION AND THANK YOU TO
THOSE WHO HAVE FORWARDED EMAILS
TO OUR ATTENTION.
THERE ARE FOUR EMAILS INCLUDED
IN THE PACKET SO PLEASE TAKE
LOOK AT THOSE IF YOU HAVEN'T
ALREADY COMMISSION MEMBERS.
ALL RIGHT.
NEXT TO THE BUSINESS SECTION
FIRST UP IS THE TWENTY TWENTY
FOUR POLICY AGENDA EVERY YEAR
WE PASS ALONG POLICY AND
LEGISLATION SUGGESTIONS TO CITY
COUNCIL ON POLICY AGENDA
COMMITTEE CONCERNING LOCAL AND
STATE ISSUES.
SO WE'D LIKE TO INTRODUCE THIS
ITEM TONIGHT TO BEGIN THE
DISCUSSION WITH ANTICIPATED
ACTION AT A FUTURE MEETINGS.
SO LIKE TO SOLICIT IDEAS FOR
OUR TWENTY FOUR POLICY AGENDA.
SO RAYMOND, IF YOU REVIEW THE
DOCUMENT THAT YOU PUT TOGETHER
AND WE'LL GET SOME SUGGESTIONS
GOING
ON JUST AS A REMINDER WE
DO THIS EVERY YEAR THE IDEA
HERE IS THAT THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION AS WELL AS WELL AS
OTHER BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CAN PROVIDE RECOMMENDATIONS TO
CITY COUNCIL ON SORT OF POLICY
OR LEGISLATIVE ISSUES,
ESPECIALLY AT A LOCAL OR STATE
LEVEL AND WHAT HAS BEEN PAST
PRACTICE WITH THIS COMMISSION
IS TO KIND OF RECYCLE THE
PREVIOUS YEAR'S POLICY AGENDA
AND MAKE MODIFICATIONS TO IT BY
EITHER STRIKING OUT THINGS THAT
HAVE BEEN DEEMED AS BEING
ACCOMPLISHED OR MAYBE NO LONGER
RELEVANT OR MAKING ADDITIONS OR
CHANGES TO SOME OF THE LANGUAGE
SO INCLUDED IN THE PACKET IS
PRETTY MUCH THE RECYCLED POLICY
AGENDA RECOMMENDATIONS FROM
LAST YEAR.
ALL I DID REALLY WAS UPDATE
SOME OF THE DATES I HAVEN'T
ADDED ANYTHING OR MADE ANY
OTHER SUBSTANTIVE CHANGES TO
IT.
SO I THINK FOR TONIGHT WHAT WE
WANTED TO DO WAS REALLY JUST
KIND OF INTRODUCE THE ITEM,
GIVE YOU AN OPPORTUNITY TO
THINK ABOUT SOME THINGS AND
THEN WE'LL SOLICIT FEEDBACK
OVER THE NEXT MONTH OR SO WE
CAN BRING BACK ANOTHER VERSION
OF THIS WITH SOME OF YOUR NEW
THOUGHTS INCLUDED THERE IN SO
I'LL JUST KIND OF QUICKLY
HIGHLIGHT SOME OF THE DIFFERENT
THEMES THAT ARE THROUGHOUT THE
REPORT.
SO STARTING OFF THE IF YOU
LOOKED AT THIS TWO PAGE
DOCUMENT, IT'S BROKEN INTO TWO
SECTIONS.
THE FIRST IS A STATE LEVEL
AGENDA.
SO AGAIN, THIS IS TYPICALLY
TARGETED AT STATE LEGISLATION
OR THE STATE LEGISLATURE TO SEE
WHAT KIND OF CHANGES COULD BE
MADE AT A STATEWIDE LEVEL THAT
COULD IMPACT IN ARBOR.
SO THE FIRST IS ABOUT REDUCING
SPEEDS AND GIVING KIND
OF MORRILTON TO LOCAL
JURISDICTIONS TO ESTABLISH
DIFFERENT SPEED LIMITS AND
USING DIFFERENT METHODOLOGIES
TO DO THAT.
THE NEXT IS ENCOURAGING THEM
NOT TO ALLOW FOR GREATER
FLEXIBILITY IN IMPLEMENTING NON
MOTORIZED FACILITIES ON STATE
TRUNK LINES, FURTHER
ENCOURAGING AND TO ADHERE TO
COMPLETE STREETS AND VISION
ZERO POLICIES NEXT ALONG WITH
THEM WHILE WE'RE ON THAT THEME
LOOKING FOR SAFE NON MOTORIZED
CROSSINGS ACROSS THE RAIL
LINES.
I KNOW THIS CAME UP EARLIER
THIS YEAR AS A RESULT OF THE
STUDY THAT I'M CURRENTLY DOING.
SO YOU WERE AHEAD OF THE CURVE
YOU HAD ALREADY STATED A
POSITION ON THAT ADVOCATE FOR
INCREASED TRANSIT FUNDING FOR
BOTH AT THE LOCAL LEVEL AND AT
THE REGIONAL LEVEL SUCH AS THE
RTA TO CONTINUE TO ADVOCATE FOR
STATEWIDE CROSSWALK LAW CHANGES
TO THE MANUAL ON UNIFORM
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES RELATED
TO BIKES MAY USEFUL LANE
LOOKING AT LEGALIZATION
OF VIDEO SURVEILLANCE OR
AUTOMATED
TRACKING FOR
NOTIFICATION OF SPEED AND
TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS ENABLE THE
REGIONAL TRANSIT AUTHORITY TO
PROCEED WITH FUNDING REQUESTS
TO IMPLEMENT TRANSIT PLANS.
ADDITIONALLY, ON THE SUBJECT
OF THE RTA ALLOW THE RTA AND
OTHER GOVERNMENTAL UNITS THE
ABILITY TO REQUEST SALES TAX
AND OTHER ALTERNATIVES TO
PROPERTY TAX MOVE AWAY FROM
LEVEL OF SERVICE TO ASSESS
IMPACTS PROJECTS AND THEN
SUPPORT THE MICHIGAN DRIVE SAFE
BILL TO RESTORE RIGHTS TO
EVERYONE WHO WISH TO BE
ELIGIBLE TO OBTAIN A DRIVER'S
LICENSE.
THOSE AGAIN WERE WHAT WE'VE
TALKED ABOUT IN YEARS PAST AND
IF YOU WANT TO CARRY THOSE
FORWARD YOU'RE MORE THAN YOU
CAN DO THAT SHIFTING TO THE
LOCAL SIDE, STRENGTHENING
PARTNERSHIPS ACROSS SOME OF THE
BIG STAKEHOLDERS I AM IN OUR
PUBLIC SCHOOLS.
THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
PRIORITIZED DECISION MAKING,
DATA DRIVEN DECISION MAKING USE
ACCESSIBILITY AS AN EVALUATION
CRITERIA FOR TRANSPORTATION
INVESTMENTS, USE BIKE LANE AND
SIDEWALK CONNECTIVITY AS A
METRIC TO PRIORITIZE
TRANSPORTATION INVESTMENTS,
EXPAND BICYCLE PURCHASE
INCENTIVE PROGRAM, INCREASE THE
AMOUNT OF SET ASIDE TO THE FUND
WHICH FUNDS A LOT OF PET
INVESTMENT AND MAINTENANCE
CONTINUE TO ADVOCATE FOR POLICY
INVESTMENT AND LAND USE
INVESTMENTS THAT ENCOURAGE
TRANSIT SUPPORTED DEVELOPMENT
STRIVE TO MAKE TRANSIT
COMMUTING FASTER, MORE
CONVENIENT AND CHEAPER INCREASE
ON TIME TRAVEL ON BUS WITH
TRANSIT ONLY LANES AND SIGNALS
THAT PRIORITIZE BUSSES TAKE
ENFORCEMENT ACTION TO MAINTAIN
CLEAR BIKE LANES, IMPLEMENT A
MAJOR STREETS TRAFFIC CALMING
SPEED MANAGEMENT PROGRAM,
INCORPORATE TRAFFIC CALMING
INTO ALL STREET RESURFACING
PROJECTS DEFINE HOW
TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURES
BE USED AND MAKE THE
DISTINCTION BETWEEN STREETS,
ROADS AND ROADS.
AND THERE'S A LITTLE REFERENCE
THERE FOR THE DEFINITION OF A
ROAD IF YOU'RE NOT FAMILIAR
WITH THE TERM AND EXPAND AND
IMPROVE INFRASTRUCTURE AND
POLICY TO ENCOURAGE THE USE
OF CLEAN ENERGY VEHICLES SUCH
AS CHARGING POLICY FOR FOUR
WHEELED LIGHT ELECTRIC
VEHICLES, ELECTRIFICATION AND
DOWNSIZING OF CITY VEHICLES,
PARKING FACILITIES TO INCLUDE
BIKE PARKING AND COVERED AREAS
AND INCENTIVES FROM THE CITY TO
ENCOURAGE USE OF CLEAN ENERGY
VEHICLES.
AND THEN THE LAST TWO ARE TO
ADVOCATE AND ENABLE LOCAL POWER
GRID INITIATIVES FOR THE EIGHT
TO ZERO PLAN WHICH WOULD ALLOW
FOR CARBON FREE CHARGING
VEHICLES AND THEN LASTLY
IMPROVE WINTER SIDEWALK
MAINTENANCE TO ENSURE
WALKABILITY AND ACCESSIBILITY
YEAR ROUND.
SO I KNOW THAT WAS A QUICK KIND
OF OVERVIEW BUT I JUST WANTED
TO KIND OF RUN THROUGH THEM
REAL QUICKLY SO THAT YOU HAVE A
SENSE FOR THE DIFFERENT THEMES
THAT HAVE EMERGED.
AGAIN, WE'RE NOT LOOKING FOR
ACTION ON THIS TONIGHT.
IT'S REALLY JUST ONE OF THOSE
THINGS TO ALLOW YOU TO START
THINKING ABOUT THINGS AND WITH
THAT I'M HAPPY TO HAVE YOU TAKE
ANY QUESTIONS YOU MIGHT HAVE.
>> YEAH, I THINK WE WANT TO
FIRM THIS UP IN JANUARY.
>> IS THAT THE RIGHT TIMELINE?
YEAH, I THINK THAT'S RIGHT.
THAT'S TYPICALLY BEEN OUR
TARGET.
I CAN CHECK TO SEE IF IT'S ABLE
TO SLIP FEBRUARY.
I FORGET WHEN THE COUNCIL
POLICY AGENDA COMMITTEE MEETS
BUT I THINK THE IDEA IS THAT
ALL THE COMMISSIONS AND
COMMITTEES HAVE EVERYTHING
SERVED UP BY A CERTAIN DATE.
SO THEN THAT WAY CITY COUNCIL
CAN TAKE ALL THAT UNDER
ADVISEMENT WHEN THEY DEVELOP
THEIR AGENDA.
>> OK, I THINK JANUARY IS
TYPICALLY WHAT WE'VE TARGETED
BECAUSE I'M SURE THAT DEADLINE
IS PROBABLY LATE JANUARY OR
EARLY FEBRUARY.
>> YEAH OK.
MET THANK YOU.
CAN YOU HEAR ME OK?
YOU NEVER KNOW RIGHT SO MY
FIRST IS A PROCESS QUESTION
REMAINED PARTIALLY JUST
ANSWERED AT SO WE SEND OUR
THOUGHTS ON THIS INTO THE
AGENDA COMMITTEE.
>> THEY RECOMMEND SOMETHING TO
CITY COUNCIL I IMAGINE THE CITY
FORMALLY ADOPT SOME FINAL
AGENDA AT SOME POINT.
RAYMOND, WHAT HAPPENS THEN IS
THE CITY HAVE AN ADVOCATE IN
LANSING LIKE DO THEY DO DO CITY
COUNCILORS GO TO LANSING AND
RUSH THE REPRESENTATIVES AND
DEMAND ALL THESE THINGS LIKE
WHAT HAPPENS?
>> HOW DOES THE CITY TRY TO
MAKE ALL THIS HAPPEN?
YEAH, MATT, I THINK AND AGAIN
I'M A COUPLE OF PHASES REMOVED
FROM THAT BUT MY UNDERSTANDING
IS WE DO HAVE A LOBBYIST THE
POLICY AGENDA COMMITTEE IS A
SUBSET AS I UNDERSTAND OF CITY
COUNCIL.
SO IT'S ALREADY MADE UP OF CITY
COUNCIL MEMBERS.
SO WHAT THEY DO IS THEY LOOK AT
EVERYTHING, PRIORITIZE IT AND
MAKE A RECOMMENDATION TO THE
FULL BODY AND THEN THAT FULL
BODY USES THAT AS A GUIDING
DOCUMENT SO WE CAN OR CITY
COUNCIL CAN GIVE THAT DIRECTION
TO THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR AND
HIS OFFICE TO ALLOW OUR
ADVOCATES IN LANSING TO
HOPEFULLY TAKE UP SOME OF THOSE
CAUSES.
AND THEN CONVERSELY ON THE
LOCAL SIDE, OBVIOUSLY CITY
COUNCIL HAS THE PURVIEW TO PASS
LEGISLATION OF ITS OWN THAT
WOULD AFFECT ANN ARBOR AND SO
THEY CAN TAKE UP SOME OF THOSE
MATTERS THEMSELVES AS WELL.
THANK YOU, MOLLY.
>> THANKS.
SO YEAH THIS SO I KNOW WE'LL
GET INTO IT.
WE'LL HAVE TIME TO SEND IN YOUR
AGENDA ITEMS BETWEEN NOW AND
NEXT MONTH.
BUT STATE JASON MORGAN RECENTLY
ANNOUNCED THE CREATION OF A
TRANSIT CORPUS AND NAME SOME
SPECIFIC POLICY GOALS AROUND
STATEWIDE TRANSIT FUNDING AND I
THINK IT'D BE GREAT.
WE ALREADY TALK ABOUT
INCREASING FUNDING FOR TRANSIT
BUT I THINK IT'D BE GREAT IF WE
COULD ALIGN THAT LANGUAGE WITH
WHAT THEY'RE ALREADY TALKING
ABOUT DOING IN THE LEGISLATURE
BECAUSE I KNOW THAT THAT CAN
HELP MAKE THINGS MOVE AND GET
LISTENED TO SO I DON'T HAVE
THAT LANGUAGE BUT IF ONE OF US
COULD SORT OF FIGURE OUT HOW
THEY'RE TALKING ABOUT IT SO WE
CAN TALK ABOUT THE SAME WAY
THAT GREAT IDEA I COMPLETELY
YES.
TUCSON'S JOUISSANCE REALLY
STEPPED UP AND WE'RE REALLY
EXCITED AND WORKING WITH HIM IS
A LOT OF FUN.
WE'RE ALSO VERY INTERESTED I
SIT ON THE BOARD OF THE STATE
TRANSIT ASSOCIATION.
ALL THE TRANSIT AGENCIES GET
TOGETHER.
WE'RE REALLY CURIOUS TO LEARN
WHAT THAT AGENDA IS THERE ARE
SOME IDEAS KICKING AROUND
LANSING THAT I'LL BE HONEST MAY
NOT BE MAYBE INTERESTING IDEAS
BUT MAY NOT MAY NOT BE EXACTLY
WHAT PEOPLE THINK.
THERE'S ONE IDEA KICKING AROUND
RIGHT NOW TO MODEL M AFTER NEW
JERSEY TRANSIT.
THERE'S SOME THERE'S SOME KIND
OF WEIRD IDEAS KICKING AROUND
IN THERE.
SO I AGREE WITH MOLLY.
LET'S LEARN LET'S LEARN
EVERYTHING WE CAN.
BUT I WOULD I WOULD PUT A PIN
IN BUYING INTO IT JUST JUST FOR
THE MOMENT UNTIL WE LEARN
THANKS.
>> I MEAN I WOULD FOCUS
SPECIFICALLY ON THE FUNDING THE
FUNDING PIECE WHICH I THINK
WE'RE PROBABLY GOING TO BE
ALIGNED WITH AROUND INCREASING
TRANSIT FUNDING.
I DON'T I CAN'T SPEAK TO THERE
ARE THINGS ALTHOUGH I WILL SAY
THAT NEW JERSEY HAS REALLY
EXCELLENT TRAINS.
SO YOU I I GIVE THEM THEY'RE
GREAT.
BUT ANYWAY
AND TONIGHT WE CAN
DISCUSS FURTHER IN JANUARY BUT
I ASSUME SOME OF THESE WE CAN
HAVE A CELEBRATORY CELEBRATORY
STRIKETHROUGH THINGS THAT WE
CAN CONSIDER ACCOMPLISHED LIKE
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF SPEED
MANAGEMENT PROGRAM, THE
NEIGHBORHOOD STREET COMING UP
WE'LL BE DOING SO THERE ARE
SOME THINGS THAT MAYBE WE'LL BE
ABLE TO COME OFF OF THIS LIST
TO.
>> YEAH AND BRET AND THANK YOU
FOR BRINGING THAT UP.
ACTUALLY WHEN I WENT THROUGH
THE LIST WHAT WERE OFTENTIMES
DONE SO LIKE SPEED MANAGEMENT
IS A GOOD EXAMPLE.
A COUPLE OF YEARS AGO THE
RECOMMENDATION WAS DEVELOP A
SPEED MANAGEMENT PROGRAM.
>> SO SPEED MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
HAS BEEN DEVELOPED NOW THE
LANGUAGE HAS BEEN CHANGED I
THINK LAST YEAR TO IMPLEMENT
THAT PLAN RIGHT.
SO A LOT OF THESE THINGS ARE
KIND OF ON A SPECTRUM AND SO
THEY SOMETIMES DON'T DROP OFF
ENTIRELY.
WE DID STRIKE THROUGH A COUPLE
OF THINGS LAST YEAR BECAUSE
THERE WERE LIKE PARKING
MINIMUMS I THINK WAS ONE OF THE
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT WAS
ESTABLISHED BY CODE SO THAT
ONCE THEY'RE PROBABLY THE
CLOSEST ONE THAT I THOUGHT
MIGHT BE UP FOR REMOVAL IS
TALKING ABOUT INCORPORATING
TRAFFIC COMING INTO RESURFACING
PROJECTS OBVIOUSLY WITH THE
RESOLUTION THAT PASSED BACK IN
SEPTEMBER.
NOW THAT'S AN ONGOING THING.
RIGHT.
BUT IN TERMS OF POLICY POLICY
HAS BEEN ESTABLISHED.
SO WHETHER YOU WANT TO CONSIDER
THAT ONE THAT ONE FEELS LIKE
THAT HAS BEEN ACCOMPLISHED FROM
A POLICY PERSPECTIVE AND
THERE'S IT'S GOING TO BE AN
ONGOING THING TO IMPLEMENTED SO
SO YEAH, WE CAN TAKE ANOTHER
LOOK AND MAKE SOME SUGGESTIONS
IN TERMS OF WHICH ONES TO MAYBE
CONSIDER ACCOMPLISHED AND THEN
YOU ALL CAN SEE IF YOU AGREE
WITH THOSE OR NOT.
SO THAT'S GOOD.
ANY OTHER COMMENTS OR QUESTIONS
AT THIS TIME PLEASE BE THINKING
ABOUT POLICY IDEAS AND
SUGGESTIONS OVER THE NEXT MONTH
AND AT THE END OF THIS MEETING
I THINK WE'LL BRING THIS
DOCUMENT BACK UP, YOU KNOW,
TALK ABOUT WHAT CAN BE REMOVED
AND WHAT IDEAS PEOPLE HAVE TO
ADD TO IT.
SO BE THINKING ABOUT THAT
PLEASE.
OK, MOVING ON THE AND IF I
COULD JUST MAKE ONE QUICK
LITTLE ANNOUNCEMENT IF IF
MEMBERS OF THE COMMISSION GET
US THEIR SUGGESTIONS AND BY US
I MEAN BRETT MEGGAN MYSELF BY
JANUARY 10TH THEN THAT'S ENOUGH
TIME FOR ME TO INCORPORATE
THOSE SUGGESTIONS FOR THE NEXT
PACKETT.
THAT'S OBVIOUSLY YOU CAN STILL
SHOW UP TO THE MEETING WITH
IDEAS HANDS.
THAT'S NOT VERBOTEN BUT IF YOU
GIVE THEM TO ME IN
ADVANCE THEN
I CAN MAKE SURE THAT THEY'RE
REFLECTED IN THE POLICY AGENDA
AND THAT GOES OUT WITH THE
PACKET FOR ALL TO SEE.
SO ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU.
ALL RIGHT.
NEXT UP IS THE TWENTY TWENTY
FOUR WORK PLAN FOR THIS
COMMISSION.
THIS IS A FOLLOW UP TO OUR
DISCUSSION ON THE TOPIC LAST
MONTH, BY THE WAY, I FORGOT TO
THANK AGAIN FOR RUNNING THE
MEETING LAST MONTH I WATCHED ON
YOUTUBE I WAS I WAS GONE BUT
LOOKS LIKE EVERYTHING WENT
WELL.
AND THANK YOU AGAIN, MEGAN FOR
RUNNING A GREAT MEETING IN
NOVEMBER.
>> I HAD A LOT OF HELP.
THANK SO AS A REMINDER EVERY
YEAR WE DEVELOP A TENTATIVE
LIST OF TOPICS THAT WE HOPE TO
COVER THROUGHOUT THE COURSE
OF THE YEAR AND TRANSPORT
COMMISSION STAFF HAS UPDATED
THE WORK PLAN BASED ON SOME
SUGGESTIONS THAT WE'VE RECEIVED
FROM COMMISSIONERS OVER THE
PREVIOUS MONTHS AS WELL AS
COORDINATION WITH PARTNER
AGENCIES.
SO LET'S WE'RE LOOKING FOR
ACTION ITEM TONIGHT.
SO RAYMOND, IF YOU COULD PULL
UP THAT TENTATIVE TWENTY TWENTY
FOUR WORK PLAN YOU CAN LOOK
THROUGH WHAT'S ON THERE.
>> YEAH.
SO THE FIRST THING TO NOTE IS
THIS IS ALWAYS A LIVING
DOCUMENT IF YOU'VE EVER OPEN
THIS UP IN JANUARY AND THEN
LOOKED AT IT AGAIN ON DECEMBER
YOU'LL NOTICE A LOT IS KIND
OF SHIFTED AND CHANGED THINGS
POP UP THAT WE WEREN'T
ANTICIPATING SOMETHING SLIDE.
SO EVEN THOUGH WE ASK FOR
APPROVAL IT'S KIND OF A SOFT
APPROVAL ACKNOWLEDGING THAT
THINGS CHANGE.
SO I'LL JUST QUICKLY RUN
THROUGH WHAT WE'VE PENCILED IN
FOR EACH OF THE MONTHS.
OBVIOUSLY THE THINGS IN THE
NEAR TERM ARE A LITTLE CLEARER
IN TERMS OF FOCUS ON THE
FURTHER OUT WE GO A LITTLE
HARDER IT IS TO REALLY
ANTICIPATE WHAT WE'LL BE
TALKING ABOUT A YEAR FROM NOW.
SO JANUARY WE PROBABLY HAVE A
PRETTY FULL AGENDA ALREADY WE
HAVE THE ANNUAL REPORT WHICH
WE'LL TOUCH ON TONIGHT.
WE HAVE THE CHAIR AND VICE
CHAIR ELECTIONS.
SO THIS IS A CALL TO ALL OF YOU
TO SET UP YOUR SUPER PACS FOR
ANYBODY WHO WANTS TO RUN FOR
CHAIR AND VICE CHAIR THE POLICY
AGENDA INPUT WHICH WE JUST
DISCUSSED WE'LL CIRCLE BACK ON
THAT.
AND IF YOU'RE READY TO TAKE
ACTION ON THAT, WE MIGHT DO
THAT NEXT MONTH AS WELL.
AND THEN THE CURRENT ROUND
OF TRAFFIC CALMING THAT WE'RE
CURRENTLY FINALIZING RIGHT NOW
WE'LL START TO POPULATE IN THE
NEXT COUPLE OF MONTHS.
SO THE FIRST WILL BE THIRD
INFORMATION ITEMS.
WE ARE HOPEFUL THAT WE'LL HAVE
THE SAFE ROUTES FOR ALL
CONTRACT EXECUTED AND WE CAN
START TO HAVE DISCUSSIONS ABOUT
WHAT THAT LOOKS LIKE MOVING
FORWARD AND PROBABLY A BIG ONE
THAT MANY OF YOU ARE GOING TO
BE INTERESTED IN IS THE TRUNK
LINE TRANSFER STUDY.
AGAIN, THIS IS THE IDEA THAT
LOOKING AT THE STATE TRUNK
LINES AND WHAT IT MIGHT ENTAIL
FOR THE CITY TO LOOK AT TAKING
THOSE OVER IN FEBRUARY TRAFFIC
COMING THIS IS A RELLA I WOULD
BE UP FOR DISCUSSION THEN WE
TYPICALLY GIVE A STREET
RESURFACING AND RELATED
PROJECTS EARLY IN THE YEAR SO
WE HAVE THAT PENCILED IN FOR
FEBRUARY.
THEN WE WANTED TO COME TO YOU
WITH THE WORK THAT'S BEEN
UNDERWAY FOR THE PROTECTED
BIKEWAY PROJECT.
THIS IS TAKING ALL THE BUFFORD
BIKE LANES AND PROTECTING THEM
,UPGRADING THEM TO PERMIT TO
HAVE VERTICAL ELEMENTS IN
MARCH.
WE ARE LOOKING AT TRAFFIC
COMING ON HENRY AND THEN OTHER
INFORMATION ITEMS THAT A
SIGNALIZED INTERSECTION AND
PEDESTRIAN CROSSING DISCUSSION.
THIS IS KIND OF TAKING
SUGGESTION FROM BOTH MOLLY AND
PETE AND KIND OF PUTTING IT IN
THIS SPACE SO THAT WE CAN KIND
OF TALK ABOUT SIGNALIZED
INTERSECTIONS, HOW THOSE ARE
PROGRAMED TRAFFIC COMING AND
SPEED MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
UPDATES.
AGAIN, WE WANT TO KIND
OF CONTINUE TO MARCH THAT
FORWARD AND GIVE YOU PERIODIC
UPDATES ON THAT AS WELL.
APRIL IS WHEN WE TYPICALLY COME
AND GIVE YOU A BUDGET UPDATE.
SO THAT'S WHAT WE'VE PENCILED
IN THERE.
AND THEN I ALSO GOT
CONFIRMATION FROM GET DOWNTOWN
THAT THEY'D BE WILLING TO COME
IN IN APRIL TO GIVE YOU UPDATES
,WHICH IS A GOOD TIME BECAUSE
TYPICALLY WE LAUNCH COMMUTER
CHALLENGE AND BIKE TO WORK
MONTH IN MAY.
SO IT'S A GOOD WAY TO KIND
OF GET PEOPLE JAZZED UP FOR
THAT IN MAY AND UPDATE FROM THE
UNIVERSITY AND THE UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN TRANSPORTATION
RESEARCH INSTITUTE AS WELL AS
THE REGIONAL TRANSIT AUTHORITY
IN JUNE ANNUAL REVIEW
OF BYELAWS WE COME UP THAT'S
JUST PERFUNCTORY AND KIND
OF ROUTINE BUT ARE THERE ANY
CHANGES THAT WE SEE?
WE CAN PROPOSE THOSE AT THAT
TIME AND THEN I'M SPRINKLING IN
ANOTHER SAFE STREETS FOR ALL
UPDATE HALFWAY THROUGH THE YEAR
IN JULY WHEN WE TYPICALLY COME
BACK TO YOU FOR CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENTS PLAN UPDATE.
JUST A LITTLE FOOTNOTE HERE
EVERY TWO YEARS IS WHEN YOU
DEVELOP A FULL NEW SIPI SO THIS
WILL BE A NEW IP ROUND AS WELL
AS THE BUDGET, THE BUDGET, THE
KIND OF GO HAND IN HAND.
WE DEVELOP A TWO YEAR BIENNIAL
BUDGET AND THE CFP IS A MAJOR
OVERHAUL EVERY TWO YEARS SO SO
THIS COMING CALENDAR YEAR WILL
BE KIND OF A BIG YEAR IN TERMS
OF BUDGET SKYPE PLANNING AUGUST
ASSUMING THE DATA IS AVAILABLE
AND WE'VE HAD THE CHANCE TO
CRUNCH THE NUMBERS.
WE'LL COME TO YOU WITH THE
ANNUAL CRASH REPORT RIGHT NOW
IN SEPTEMBER.
WE DON'T HAVE ANYTHING BUT I'M
SURE THAT'S BOUND TO CHANGE SO
DON'T PLAN ANY VACATIONS JUST
YET.
I'M SURE WE'LL STILL HAVE THAT
MEETING IN OCTOBER .
AN UPDATE FROM ANN ARBOR PUBLIC
SCHOOLS IN NOVEMBER IS WHEN WE
TALK ABOUT THE CALENDAR MEETING
DATES FOR THE NEXT YEAR AND
THEN DECEMBER JUST AS WE'RE
DOING TONIGHT TALKING ABOUT THE
WORK PROGRAM I'M SORRY THE WORK
PLAN, THE ANNUAL REPORT AND
POLICY AGENDA INPUT.
SO THAT'S WHAT WE CURRENTLY
HAVE PENCILED IN RIGHT NOW.
ONE THING I DID WANT TO MENTION
ESPECIALLY RELATED TO PETE HAD
TWO SUGGESTIONS.
ONE I MENTIONED EARLIER WAS
SIGNALIZED INTERSECTIONS AND
PEDESTRIAN CROSSINGS.
THAT'S WHAT IS MEANT TO ADDRESS
ONE OF HIS SUGGESTIONS.
THE OTHER WAS ABOUT SORT
OF CRASH REPORTING AND HAVING A
SORT OF TASK FORCE OR A MORE
CRITICAL LOOK AT THAT.
AND THE REASON WHY I DIDN'T
PROGRAM THAT HERE IS I THOUGHT
THAT MIGHT ACTUALLY FIT BETTER
UNDER THE POLICY AGENDA BECAUSE
THAT FEELS LIKE A
RECOMMENDATION TO ESTABLISH A
THING OR IT CAN BE SOMETHING
THAT YOU KNOW, THE COMMISSION
CAN SPONSOR A RESOLUTION OR
SOMETHING LIKE THAT TO THAT
EFFECT BECAUSE THE REPORTING IS
WHAT WE'RE DOING NIGHT.
AND THEN WHAT WE DO WITH THAT
REPORTING ARE WHAT THE
COMMISSION DECIDES TO DO.
THAT REPORTING IS IN THE
COMMISSION'S PURVIEW SO SO I
WANTED TO JUST GIVE THAT QUICK
OVERVIEW.
I'M HAPPY TO ENTERTAIN ANY
QUESTIONS.
WE CAN INSERT SOME OTHER THINGS
HERE AS WELL AS YOU SEE FIT AND
WE CAN BUTTON IT UP AND IF YOU
FEEL COMFORTABLE APPROVING IT
TONIGHT, THAT WOULD BE WELCOME
AS WELL.
YES, UP COOL.
THANKS FOR THE OVERVIEW,
RAYMOND.
JUST REAL QUICK I THINK IN
DECEMBER IT WOULD BE FISCAL
YEAR TWENTY TWENTY FIVE
PLANNING TWENTY TWENTY FOUR
PLATES JUST JUST ON MAN MEETING
THAT MISTAKE ALL THE TIME AND
PUT TWENTY TWENTY FOUR TWENTY
THREE.
THE OTHER TOPICS THAT I'D LOVE
TO SEE US MAYBE EXPLORE A
LITTLE MORE WOULD BE A STUDY
UTILIZING POTENTIALLY LINEAR
PARKS TO PROVIDE BOTH
PEDESTRIAN ACCESS AND GREATER
ACCESS TO PARKS.
WHAT I MEAN BY THAT WHEN I WAS
AT CITY HALL THERE'S A MAP THAT
SHOWS KIND OF REAL ANALYSIS
OF WHERE PEOPLE HAVE LIKE I
THINK IT'S LIKE A THOUSAND FEET
OR SOMETHING WALK WALKABILITY
TO PARKS.
THERE ARE AREAS WHERE THERE ARE
GAPS IN ACCESS AND SO ONE
OF THE THINGS THAT I'VE SEEN
DONE IN OTHER CITIES IS THE USE
OF LINEAR PARKS.
AND SO I MEAN THIS IS NOT TO
SAY LIKE WE RUSH INTO IT BUT AT
LEAST FROM A TRANSPORTATION
STANDPOINT THINK ABOUT
POTENTIAL CORRIDORS OR AREAS
THAT COULD UTILIZE LINEAR PARKS
NOT ONLY AS EQUITABLE
PEDESTRIAN WALKABLE AREA BUT
THAT HELPS PEOPLE HAVE ACCESS
TO RECREATION SO THE BASICALLY
A STUDY OF THE POTENTIAL USE
OF LINEAR PARKS AND SO ANYWAYS
I WANTED TO PUT THAT ON THE
RADAR AND IT JUST WAS FROM
WALKING AND SEEING THAT MAP
OF THE RADIAL ACCESS TO PARKS
AND SO I KNOW THE PARKS LIKE
TAPPED OUT ALREADY.
THERE'S A LOT OF PARKS BUT THE
USE OF LINEAR PARKS COULD BE
USEFUL I THINK FOR NOT ONLY
CREATING RECREATION BUT GETTING
PEOPLE MORE COMFORTABLE WALKING
IN AREAS.
>> THAT'S IT FOR ME.
YEAH, ONE IF I COULD HELP
UNPACK THAT A LITTLE BIT WHEN
YOU SAY A STUDY I JUST WANT TO
CLARIFY WHAT YOUR EXPECTATION
IS ON THAT SO AND AND AGAIN IF
THE IDEA IS TO INITIATE A STUDY
THAT MIGHT BE A GOOD POLICY
AGENDA RECOMMENDATION THE IDEA
IS TO GET LIKE AN UPDATE FROM
PARKS OR YOU MAY RECALL A
COUPLE OF MONTHS AGO WE GOT AN
UPDATE FROM THE TREE LINE
CONSERVANCY.
I THINK THAT COULD BE SOMETHING
I CAN EASILY PROGRAM BECAUSE I
HAVE A RESOURCE THAT I CAN
PRESENT.
BUT IF IT'S TALKING ABOUT
DEVELOPING A NEW REPORT OR NEW
STUDY AND WE DON'T HAVE FUNDING
AND WE DON'T HAVE THE CAPACITY
TO DO THAT, THAT FEELS LIKE
THAT MIGHT TRANSITION MORE
TOWARDS ASKING COUNCIL OR
SOMEONE TO PUT RESOURCES
TOWARDS THAT.
SO I JUST WANT TO SURE I
UNDERSTAND IF WE SHOULD BE
TALKING ABOUT IT HERE OR IF YOU
THINK MAYBE THIS POLICY AGENDA
OR BOTH OR OR WHAT HAVE YOU THE
FORMER THE ONE THAT WE DO HAVE
RESOURCES OR CONNECTIONS FOR, I
MIGHT RECOMMEND THAT THE FALL
OF THE ROAD DIET OR ROAD
RECONFIGURATION EFFORT THAT'S
WHAT WE'RE STARTING TO GET INTO
IF THERE ARE ROAD DIETS DONE OR
ROAD NARROWINGS DONE THAT COULD
OPEN UP OPPORTUNITIES FOR
LINEAR PARKS PERHAPS.
YEAH, I LOVE THAT IDEA.
THANK FOR CLEARLY ARTICULATE
WAS TRYING TO ESSENTIALLY HOW
CAN WE KIND OF HAVE MULTIPLE
PURPOSE FOR IF WE ARE TAKING
AWAY FROM AUTO CENTRIC TOWARDS
THAT I JUST STOP LOOKING AT
PHOTOS SO THEY JUST DID AN
INCREDIBLE JOB WITH LINEAR
PARKS AND I THOUGHT TO MYSELF
YOU KNOW THIS IS YOUR IT'S NOT
ONLY IS IT USED FOR PEDESTRIAN
BUT IT'S ALSO RECREATION
AND
ACCESS TO KIND OF LIKE GREEN
TREES AND THINGS OF THAT
NATURE.
SO SO YEAH MORE I GUESS THE
POLICY SIDE NOT LOOKING FOR A
CONSULTANT STUDY THIS BUT JUST
PUTTING IT ON YOUR RADAR THAT I
THINK WE COULD KNOCK OUT A FEW
DIFFERENT STONES WITH OR NOT
KNOCK OUT A FEW DIFFERENT BIRDS
WITH ONE STONE KIND.
SO AND I THINK ONE OTHER ASPECT
OF THAT COULD BE THE DISCUSSION
OF PEDESTRIANISM ROADS IN THE
DOWNTOWN CORE WHICH I THINK
COULD BE A FALLOUT FROM THE
DOWNTOWN CIRCULATION'S STUDY.
THERE COULD BE RECOMMENDATIONS
PEDESTRIAN ISING CERTAIN BLOCKS
WHICH COULD BE CONSIDERED A
LINEAR PARK.
SO THAT KIND OF GOES TOGETHER.
I THINK THAT BEFORE I FORGET
THAT MIGHT BE ANOTHER AGENDA
ITEM.
THE DOWNTOWN CIRCULATION'S
STUDY RESULTS I DON'T KNOW IF
YOU HAVE AN IDEA WHEN SUMMER OR
FALL OR SOMETHING LIKE THAT I'M
SURE WILL BE A GOOD AGENDA
TOPIC.
>> THANK YOU.
THANKS, RAYMOND.
I THINK LAST MONTH WE HAD
FLOATED THE IDEA OF ADDING BUS
LANES TO THE WORK PLAN BUT I
ALSO SEE TRANSIT ONLY LANES IN
THE POLICY AGENDA.
WHERE DO YOU THINK THAT ISSUE
IS CAPTURED?
>> YEAH, I GUESS AGAIN WHEN IF
SO FOR EXAMPLE MATT, IF YOU
WANTED TO COME AND GIVE A
PRESENTATION ON WHAT BRT IS OR
DEDICATED LANES OR EVEN
PREVIOUSLY LIKE ONE IF YOU
WANTED TO PRESENT ON THE LINEAR
PARK CONCEPT WE'D BE HAPPY TO
WORK WITH YOU ON THAT OR IF
DIRECT US TO TO FIND SOME
INFORMATION WE CAN DO THAT AS
WELL.
SO AGAIN I THINK TYPICALLY WE
HAVE KIND OF A SLATE OF ACTIONS
THAT OUR PRESENTATION OR KIND
OF ROUTINE ACTIONS THAT THE
COMMISSION DOES IF YOU'RE
LOOKING FOR KNOW POLICY TYPE
THINGS, IT'S WE HAVE TO FIGURE
OUT DOES IT FIT ON THE POLICY
AGENDA.
SO IF LIKE THE POLICY THAT WE
JUST TALKED ABOUT TALKS ABOUT
MORE DEDICATED LANES, THINGS
LIKE THAT SO I GUESS WHAT I'M
GETTING AT IS I COULD GIVE A
PRESENTATION ON WHAT'S IN THE
TRANSPORTATION PLAN.
MATT COULD GIVE A PRESENTATION
ON WHAT'S IN THE TWENTY FORTY
FIVE TRANSIT PLAN.
BUT IN TERMS OF WHAT COMES NEXT
WITH THAT, IS THERE A
RECOMMENDATION IS THERE
SOMETHING LIKE THAT THAT'S
REALLY UP FOR THE COMMISSION TO
DECIDE AND AND SO SO YEAH
THAT'S WHY THERE ARE ALWAYS
OPPORTUNITIES IF IT'S IF IT'S
JUST POLICY AND LEGISLATIVE
FOCUS WE CAN PUT IT ON WHAT WE
JUST TALKED ABOUT IF IT'S MORE
INFORMATIONAL LEADING TO MAYBE
A POLICY THING, WE CAN PUT IT
ON THE WORK PLAN SO IT REALLY
JUST DEPENDS.
>> I THINK THE INTENT FROM THE
RIDE IS TO BRING FORWARD
SOMETHING CLOSER TO A DRAFT
PROPOSAL TO THE COMMISSION FOR
FEEDBACK.
SO THAT WOULD BE MORE
SPECIFICALLY TRANSIT LANES ON
THIS ROAD, THAT ROAD, THIS
SEGMENT THAT SORT OF THING.
I'D LOVE TO USE YOU GUYS AS A
SOUNDING BOARD AND GET SOME
FEEDBACK ON THAT.
I DON'T KNOW WHERE THAT BEST
SITS AND I'M MORE THAN HAPPY TO
LEAVE IT TO YOU BECAUSE I DON'T
HAVE A SPECIFIC DATE YET.
WE'RE STILL WORKING THROUGH THE
DETAILS.
WE CAN PLAY IT BY EAR.
I DO SEE SOME OPEN SLOTS HERE
AND WE CAN JUST SORT OF FIGURE
IT OUT AT THE COMMISSION'S
DISCRETION.
>> OF COURSE
THAT SOUNDS LIKE A
GOOD GOOD IDEA FOR TOPIC.
THANKS PETER.
FIRST OF ALL, I'D LIKE TO
ENCOURAGE EVERYONE TO VISIT MY
FAVORITE LINNEAR PARK WHICH IS
EISENHAUER PARK.
SO THAT WHEN THE CITY'S PARKS
SYSTEM AS FOR THE THE CRASH
RESPONSE PROTOCOL TOPIC THAT I
WANTED TO ADD TO OUR WORK PLAN,
I GUESS I'M JUST WE'D LIKE YOUR
INPUT, RAYMONDE ON ON THE RIGHT
WAY TO COME UP WITH THE
RECOMMENDATION.
THAT'S NOT SOMETHING THAT I
THINK I CAN EFFECTIVELY DO IN A
VACUUM.
BUT I BUT I UNDERSTAND HOW IT
MIGHT REQUIRE ACTION FROM CITY
COUNCIL BECAUSE IT COULD HAVE
LIKE STAFFING AND FUNDING
IMPLICATIONS.
UM, SO IS THE RIGHT THING TO DO
TO DEVELOP A RESOLUTION AND IF
SO AT WHAT LEVEL OF DETAIL
NEEDS TO BE IN THERE?
I WOULD JUST LIKE YEAH A COUPLE
OF WAYS WE CAN HANDLE IT.
RIGHT.
SO I THINK IT MAY HAVE BEEN A
YEAR OR 18 MONTHS OR SO AGO WE
GAVE A SORT OF BRIEF OVERVIEW
ON WHAT THE CRASH RESPONSE
PROTOCOL IS AND SO WHAT WE CAN
DO IS WE CAN GIVE AN
INFORMATIONAL ITEM MYSELF
PARTNERED WITH LIEUTENANT
SCHERBA CYNTHIA REININGER WE
KIND OF JUST TALK ABOUT WHAT
THAT IS JUST AS A SORT OF LIKE
REFRESHER INFORMATION ALSO THAT
EVERYBODY UNDERSTANDS WHAT THAT
IS THEN WITH THAT INFORMATION,
YOU KNOW, AS IS OFTENTIMES THE
CASE.
RIGHT.
LIKE IF YOU THINK ABOUT YOU
THINK ABOUT THE ROAD DIET WE
GIVE A ROAD DIET PRESENTATION
AND I THINK AUGUST WHICH THEN
TEED UP THE RESOLUTION THAT WAS
ULTIMATELY BROUGHT BACK AND I
BELIEVE SEPTEMBER FOUR OR NOT
I'M SORRY BUT THAT WAS THE
TRAFFIC.
SO YEAH, ULTIMATELY WAS PASSED
BY COUNCIL IN NOVEMBER.
SO SO THAT COULD BE KIND OF THE
SEQUENCE OF THINGS.
SO IN TERMS OF PROGRAMING, YOU
KNOW, CRASH RESPONSE PROTOCOL
INFORMATIONAL ITEM WE CAN PUT
THAT ON THE WORKPLAN AND OR IT
CAN ALSO GO INTO I KNOW PETER
I'VE SEEN IN SOME OF YOUR
PRESENTATIONS KIND OF CREATING
A NEW SORT OF INVESTIGATIVE
TYPE UNIT AND I'M NOT USING THE
RIGHT WORDS SO PLEASE FORGIVE
ME FOR THAT.
BUT YOU KNOW THAT MIGHT FIT
UNDER THE POLICY AGENDA.
SO I KNOW IT'S KIND
OF SEMANTICS AND I FEEL LIKE
KIND OF TALKING IN CIRCLES BUT
IT REALLY JUST DEPENDS ON WHAT
YOU WANT THE OUTCOME TO BE IF
AND AND WE'RE HAPPY TO WORK
WITH YOU ON THAT.
SO I'M NOT TRYING TO, YOU KNOW,
PUT ANY ONE.
YOU'RE RIGHT.
JUST TRYING TO FIGURE REALLY
WHAT YOU WANT THE OUTCOME TO BE
.
I GUESS I FEEL LIKE WE WOULD
NEED TO GIVE A GOOD A GOOD
PROPOSAL TO CITY COUNCIL IF WE
WERE GOING TO BE ASKING THEM
FOR SOMETHING LIKE THAT.
THAT'S PROBABLY NOT SOMETHING
THAT THEY'RE GOING TO DEVELOP
ON THEIR OWN LIKE WE WOULD NEED
TO GIVE THEM ENOUGH DETAIL TO
BE ABLE TO ACT ON IT AND
PERHAPS CHANGE IT AROUND THE
EDGES OR CHANGE IT TO WHAT THEY
THINK IS BEST.
BUT WE NEED TO GIVE THEM A GOOD
STARTING POINT THE SAME WAY
THAT WE DID WITH THE WITH THE
ROAD RESOLUTION FEW MEETINGS
AGO.
SO IS THE RIGHT PLACE TO START
THEN A PRESENTATION ON WHAT THE
CURRENT STATE IS AND THEN IF
YOU HAVE A MEETING OR TWO AFTER
THAT TO HAVE SOME PROPOSAL TO
TO EVALUATE I MEAN I GUESS
THAT'S HOW I WOULD SEE YOU
GOING.
>> YEAH.
I MEAN THAT'S A PERFECTLY
REASONABLE WAY TO APPROACH IT.
>> OK, ALL RIGHT.
SO HOW DO WE TARGET I MEAN
WHICH MEETINGS WOULD BE
TARGETED?
>> I THINK WE JUST TARGET AN
INFORMATIONAL TOPIC RIGHT
SOMETIME MAYBE IN THE SPRING
SUMMER WE HAVE TO GAP WE HAVE
THE SPOT TO LIKE YES I TALK
ABOUT THE CURRENT STATE
OF THINGS AND THEN GIVE PEOPLE
SOME TIME TO THINK ABOUT IF
THEY WANT CHANGES AND PROPOSE
WHAT THOSE CHANGES MIGHT BE AT
A FUTURE MEETING.
>> BUT LET'S START WITH LOOKING
AT LOOKING AT SPRING AND SUMMER
WITH WHAT LOOKS LIKE A GOOD
TIME TO TARGET.
I MEAN LOOKING AT THE DOCUMENT
THAT RAYMOND SHOWED.
YEAH.
I MEAN LIKE YOU SAID, IT'S VERY
FLUID.
I MEAN IT'S WE DON'T WE DON'T
HAVE JANUARY'S AGENDA SET YET.
SO I MEAN THAT'S IT'S NOT GOING
TO BE JANUARY OR FEBRUARY OR
MARCH PROBABLY.
BUT I WOULD COMPARE WITH BRAD I
THINK STARTING IN APRIL IS WHEN
WE START TO HAVE MORE ROOM TO
FILL ON THE AGENDA SO ALL
RIGHT.
I THINK THAT SOUNDS LIKE A GOOD
PLAN TO LET'S LET'S TARGET
SPRING.
ALL RIGHT.
ANY OTHER SUGGESTIONS FOR THE
WORK PLAN FOR THE YEAR?
>> ALL RIGHT.
SO CAN I GET A MOTION TO
APPROVE THE TWENTY TWENTY FOUR
WORK PLAN AS DISCUSSED AND
ADDED TO YOUR TONIGHT BY ONE
WELL SECONDED BY AND ALL THOSE
IN FAVOR OF THE MOTION PLEASE
SAY YES OR RAISE YOUR HAND.
YEAH, ALL THOSE OPPOSED PLEASE
THEY KNOW OR RAISE YOUR HAND
MOTION PASSES RIGHT.
>> THANK YOU AND JUST SAY NO I
WILL GO AHEAD AND TAKE THE
RECOMMENDATIONS FROM TONIGHT.
I'LL TAKE THOSE IN AND THEN
I'LL FINALIZE IT AND
RECIRCULATE IT SO AT LEAST WE
HAVE WE ALSO PUT THIS ON THE
WEBSITE JUST AS A SORT
OF INFORMATIONAL ITEM.
SO AGAIN STILL SUBJECT TO
CHANGE BUT AT LEAST IT'LL SHOW
THAT YOUR SUGGESTIONS FOR
TONIGHT YEAH, WE WILL WE WILL
ONLY HAVE MORE TOPICS THAN THAN
WHAT'S SHOWN HERE.
THINGS ALWAYS COME UP
FORTUNATELY MOVING ON TO THE
NEXT TOPIC IS THE RIDES TWENTY
TWENTY FOUR MILEAGE SERVICE
IMPROVEMENTS PLAN SO THE RIDE
ASKED TO SPEAK TO THE
COMMISSION ABOUT PROPOSED
SERVICE IMPROVEMENTS CURRENTLY
IN THE WORKS AS A RESULT OF THE
TWENTY TWENTY FOUR MILLAGE.
SO THAT IS THAT CAN BE YOU
TONIGHT OR IT'S GOING TO BE TO
ME.
>> ALL RIGHT SO I JUST DO A MIC
CHECK TO MAKE SURE I CAN BE
HEARD PERFECTIVE ALSO NOW LET'S
DO A SCREEN SHARE CHECK MAKE
SURE THAT I GOT THAT ONE RIGHT
.
IS THERE A PRESENTATION SLIDE
UP NOW?
IT'S STILL THINKING BUT IT
LOOKS LIKE IT'S COMING UP.
THERE WE GO.
HOW ABOUT GOOD?
OK,
JUST A SECOND PLEASE.
SO I'D LIKE TO SAY HELLO TO
EVERYONE IN IT'S GOOD TO BE
BACK.
WE'RE GOING TO GIVE A
PRESENTATION WHICH SHOULD TAKE
A LITTLE LESS THAN TEN MINUTES
OR SO.
SO SINCE I CAN'T ALWAYS SEE
WHEN I'M WORKING OFF OF MY
LAPTOP WHEN PEOPLE ARE RAISING
HANDS IT'S AN OK IF WE HOLD
QUESTIONS AND COMMENTS TO THE
END AND THEN I WILL BE HAPPY
ANSWER WHATEVER WE CAN.
ABSOLUTELY WE'LL DO THAT AND
CAN THERE'S A COUPLE OF GRAY
BOXES LIKE ALONG THE TOP AND
THE LEFT HAND SIDE IT'S NOT
LIKE TOTALLY INTRUSIVE BUT
THERE WE GO.
THAT'S LEFT AND THEN HOW LET ME
ASK A QUESTION THEN I THINK WE
CAN GET BY AS IT IS BUT ALL
RIGHT OK, THANK YOU.
>> RECORDING IN PROGRESS OK
SORRY THE ONE BLUEBOX MOVED
OVER ONTO THE TOP OF THE ONE
WHERE I MY NOTE SO JUST TAKING
A SECOND TO JUST OK THANK YOU
FOR GIVING US THE OPPORTUNITY
TO PRESENT THE RIGHT TWENTY
TWENTY FOUR MILITARY SERVICE
PROPOSAL IN 2022 THE COMMUNITY
APPROVED THE RIGHT TWENTY YEAR
LONG RANGE PLAN ALONG WITH THE
RENEWAL OF THE EXPANDED
PROPERTY VILLAGES IN THE CITY
OF ANN ARBOR, CITY OF YPSILANTI
AND YPSILANTI TOWNSHIP.
THE PLAN PRESENTED HERE
REPRESENTS THE FIRST FIVE YEAR
PHASE OF EXPANDED SERVICES IN
THIS LONG RANGE PLAN USING
FUNDING FROM THE MILLAGE PASSED
IN TWENTY TWO IN TWENTY TWENTY
FOUR THE RIGHT IS PROPOSING TO
IMPLEMENT EXPANDED SERVICES IN
TWO PHASES STARTING IN LATE
APRIL TWENTY TWENTY FOR A NEW
LIMITED STOP EXPRESS BUS ROUTE
BETWEEN AND I BRING UP THE
LANDING ALONG WASHTENAW AVENUE
OPERATING MONDAY THROUGH FRIDAY
.
SHORTAGES OF EITHER VEHICLES OR
MOTOR COACH OPERATORS MAY
DELAYED THE START OF EXPRESS
SERVICE TO LATE AUGUST
OF TWENTY TWENTY FOUR BEGINNING
IN LATE AUGUST OF TWENTY TWENTY
FOUR EXTENDED HOURS OF FIXED
ROUTE SERVICE SEVEN DAYS A WEEK
INCREASED FIXED ROUTE SERVICE
FREQUENCY ON SATURDAYS AND
SUNDAYS ROUTING OR TIMING
ADJUSTMENTS FOR FIXED ROUTES
FOR SIX IN TWENTY FOUR AND
EXPANDED FLECK'S WRITE LATE
NIGHT AND HOLIDAY SERVICES THE
EXPRESS BUS ROUTE WILL RUN FROM
THE TRANSIT CENTER IN DOWNTOWN
YPSILANTI TO THE TRANSIT CENTER
DOWNTOWN ANN ARBOR USING THE
WASHTENAW AVENUE CORRIDOR
EXPRESS BUSSES WILL SERVE FOUR
STOPS IN BETWEEN THE TRANSIT
CENTERS IN YPSILANTI AND ANN
ARBOR.
>> THE STOPS WILL BE LOCATED AT
THE CENTRAL CAMPUS TRANSIT
CENTER.
THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
CENTRAL CAMPUS WATCHED BY
AVENUE AT OUR LAND MALL IN ANN
ARBOR, WASHTENAW AVENUE AT GULF
SIDE ROAD IN YPSILANTI TOWNSHIP
IN WASHTENAW AVENUE AT SUMMIT
STREET IN YPSILANTI CITY
EXPRESS BUSSES WILL NOT SERVE
STOPS IN BETWEEN THOSE SHOWN
HERE.
HOWEVER LOCAL ROUTE FOUR BUSSES
WILL CONTINUE TO SERVE ALL
CURRENT STOPS ALONG THE ENTIRE
ROUTE.
RIDERS WISHING TO REACH THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN'S
MEDICAL CAMPUS AREA CAN EITHER
USE LOCAL ROUTE FOR BUSSES OR
CAN TRANSFER TO THE UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN'S BLUE BUS ROUTES
THAT CENTRAL CAMPUS TRANSIT
CENTER EXPRESS SERVICE WILL
OPERATE EVERY THIRTY MINUTES
MONDAY THROUGH FRIDAY FROM 6:00
A.M. TO SIX P.M. THE FIRST TRIP
OF THE MORNING TO ANN ARBOR
WILL DEPART THE YPSILANTI
TRANSIT CENTER AT 6:00 A.M. THE
FIRST TRIP OF THE MORNING TO
YPSILANTI WILL DEPART THE BLAKE
TRANSIT CENTER AT SIX FORTY
FIVE A.M. THE LAST TRIP OF THE
EVENING TO YPSILANTI WILL
DEPART THE BLAKE TRANSIT CENTER
AT SIX FIFTEEN AND THE LAST
TRIP OF THE EVENING TO ANN
ARBOR WILL DEPART THE YPSILANTI
TRANSIT CENTER AT SIX O'CLOCK
TRIPS IN THE MORNING.
MID-AFTERNOON WILL TAKE
APPROXIMATELY 30 TO 35 MINUTES
TO RUN BETWEEN ANN ARBOR AND
YPSILANTI AND TRIPS IN THE LATE
AFTERNOON EXCUSE TRIPS IN THE
LATE AFTERNOON AND EARLY
EVENING WILL TAKE APPROXIMATELY
35 TO 40 MINUTES TO RUN BETWEEN
ANN ARBOR AND YPSILANTI.
THE NEXT SET OF PROPOSED
IMPROVEMENTS IS EXTENDED HOURS
FOR FIXED ROUTE BUSSES.
EXPANDED HOURS OF SERVICE ARE
SCHEDULED TO LAUNCH IN LATE
AUGUST OF TWENTY TWENTY FOUR ON
WEEKDAYS OUR SERVICE WILL BE
EXTENDED TO START AT 6:00 A.M.
AND 12:00 MIDNIGHT.
THESE ARE APPROXIMATE FIRST AND
LAST TRIP DEPARTURE TIME SO
SPECIFIC ROUTES MAY START OR
END SLIGHTLY EARLIER LATER THAN
THESE TIMES.
THE ROUTE SHOWN HERE WILL HAVE
EXTENDED HOURS OF WEEKDAY
SERVICE
ON SATURDAYS.
>> HOURS OF SERVICE WILL BE
EXTENDED TO START AT 7:00 A.M.
AND END AT 11:00 P.M. THESE ARE
ALSO APPROXIMATE FIRST AND LAST
TRIP DEPARTURE TIME.
SO SPECIFIC ROUTES MAY START OR
END EARLIER OR LATER SLIGHTLY
THAN THESE TIMES ALL THE ROUTES
SHOWN HERE WILL HAVE EXTENDED
SATURDAY HOURS OF SERVICE ON
SUNDAYS.
THE HOURS OF SERVICE WILL BE
EXTENDED TO START AT 8:00 A.M.
AND AT NINE FORTY FIVE P.M.
THESE ARE ALSO APPROXIMATELY
THE LAST TRIP DEPARTURE TIME
AND ALL OF THE ROUTES SHOWN
HERE WILL HAVE EXTENDED SUNDAY
HOURS OF SERVICE
.
THE NEXT SET OF EXPANDED
SERVICES IS INCREASED FREQUENCY
ON WEEKENDS FOR FIXED ROUTE
BUSTARDS.
INCREASED WEEKEND FREQUENCIES
ARE SCHEDULED TO LAUNCH IN LATE
AUGUST OF TWENTY TWENTY FOUR ON
WEEKENDS ROUTES WILL OPERATE
EVERY THIRTY MINUTES BEFORE
6:00 P.M. AND EVERY SIXTY
MINUTES AFTER SIX O'CLOCK.
THIS WILL INCLUDE ALL ROUTES
THAT OPERATE CURRENTLY ON
SATURDAY AND SUNDAY ROUTES
WHICH CURRENTLY OPERATE EVERY
THIRTY MINUTES AFTER SIX GLAC
P.M. WILL CONTINUE TO RUN AT
THAT FREQUENCY DURING THE
EVENING A ADJUSTMENTS WILL BE
MADE TO THE FOLLOWING ROUTES
FOR SIX AND TWENTY FOUR IN THE
SCHEDULE.
THESE CHANGES ARE SCHEDULED TO
BE IMPLEMENTED IN LATE AUGUST
OF TWENTY TWENTY FOUR ROUTE FOR
WASHTENAW TIMING FOR ALL LOCAL
ROUTE FOR TRIPS WILL BE
ADJUSTED THAT WILL INCLUDE
WEEKDAY, SATURDAY AND SUNDAY
TRIPS TRAFFIC LEVELS IN
DOWNTOWN ANN ARBOR, DOWNTOWN
YPSILANTI AND THE ENTIRE
WASHTENAW AVENUE CORRIDOR ARE
RETURNING TO PRE PANDEMIC
LEVELS.
SO AS A RESULT CURRENT LOCAL
BUS SCHEDULES MAY NOT CURRENTLY
REFLECT TRAFFIC CONDITIONS
DURING CERTAIN TIMES OF THE DAY
RETIMING THESE LOCAL TRIPS WILL
BE AN ATTEMPT TO MORE PRECISELY
ALIGN SCHEDULES WITH CURRENT
TRAFFIC CONGESTION ROUTE SIX ON
ELSWORTH ROUTE SIX WILL BE
SEPARATED INTO TWO BRANCHES.
THE FIRST BRANCH WILL BE
DESIGNATED SIX A AND WILL USE
EXISTING ROUTING BETWEEN THE
BLAK TRANSIT CENTER AND
YPSILANTI TRANSIT CENTER.
THE SECOND BRANCH WILL BE
DESIGNATED ROUTE SIX B AND WILL
MAKE TRIPS BETWEEN THE BLAK
TRANSIT CENTER AND BRIARWOOD
MALL USING EXISTING ROUTING 6B
TRIPS WILL OPERATE MONDAY
THROUGH FRIDAY FROM
APPROXIMATELY 6:00 A.M. TO 6:00
P.M. AT 6:00.
A TRIP TO THE YPSILANTI WILL
CONTINUE TO OPERATE SEVEN DAYS
A WEEK.
SIX DAY AND SIX B TRIPS WILL
ALTERNATE COMBINING TO PROVIDE
SERVICE EVERY 15 MINUTES
BETWEEN THE BLAK TRANSIT CENTER
AND BRIARWOOD MALL.
THIS COMBINATION OF SERVICE IS
GOING TO REPLACE ROUTE TWENTY
FOUR IN THE CORRIDOR BETWEEN
THE BLAK TRANSIT CENTER AND
BRIARWOOD SIX A SERVICE BETWEEN
THE BLAK TRANSIT CENTER AND THE
YPSILANTI TRANSIT CENTER WILL
CONTINUE TO OPERATE EVERY 30 TO
60 MINUTES TIMINGS FOR ALL
ROUTES SIX TRIPS WILL BE
ADJUSTED.
THIS WILL INCLUDE WEEKDAY
SATURDAYS AND SUNDAYS
ROUTE
TWENTY FOUR EISENHOWER GULF
SIDE ROUTE TWENTY FOUR WILL BE
SHORTENED TO PROVIDE SERVICE
BETWEEN THE CRANBROOK TOWER
AREA BRIARWOOD MALL AND THE
TRINITY HEALTH ST. JOSEPH MERCY
HOSPITAL AREA.
EXISTING ROUTING WILL BE USED.
THIS NEW ROUTING WILL BE
OPERATED SEVEN DAYS A WEEK
WHICH GIVES US THE ABILITY TO
EXTEND SERVICE TO WASHTENAW
COMMUNITY COLLEGE IN THE ST.
JOSEPH'S HOSPITAL AREA ON
SUNDAYS THE SEGMENT BETWEEN
BRIARWOOD MALL AND THE BLAKE
TRANSIT CENTER WILL EXCUSE ME
THE SEGMENT BETWEEN BLACKWOOD
MALL THE BRIGHT TRANSIT CENTER
WILL BE REPLACED BY ROUTE SIX B
TRANSFERS BETWEEN ROUTE TWENTY
FOUR AND ROUTE SIX.
B WILL BE AVAILABLE BRIARWOOD
MALL SERVICE ON ROUTE TWENTY
FOUR WILL CONTINUE TO OPERATE
EVERY 30 TO 60 MINUTES SEVEN
DAYS A WEEK.
ROUTE TWENTY FOUR IS NO IS
GOING TO BE CHANGED TO SIXTY
SEVEN TO FIT INTO OUR CROSSTOWN
NUMBERING SCHEME BUT THE NAME
WILL REMAIN AT EISENHOWER GULF
SIDE TIMINGS FOR OUR ROUTE.
TWENTY FOUR TRIPS WILL BE
ADJUSTED AND THIS WILL INCLUDE
WEEKDAY, SATURDAY AND SUNDAY
TRIPS.
IT FINALLY FLEX RIDE SERVICES
FLEX RIDE LATE NIGHT AND
HOLIDAY RIDE SERVICE WILL
EXPAND COVERAGE TO INCLUDE ALL
OF ATLANTIC CITY IN YPSILANTI
TOWNSHIP NORTH OF TEXTILE ROAD
TO MATCH THE FIXED ROUTE BUS
SERVICE AREA HOURS OF SERVICE
WILL BE EXTENDED TO COMPLEMENT
THE NEW FIXED ROUTE SERVICE.
IN ADDITION TO COVERING NEW
AREAS, THE SERVICE EXPANSION
WILL ALSO ADD MORE VEHICLES TO
REDUCE AVERAGE WAIT TIMES.
ALL FLEX RIDE SERVICES WILL NOW
INCORPORATE NEW TECHNOLOGIES TO
IMPROVE TO IMPROVE THE
EFFICIENCY OF TRIP BOOKINGS,
ROUTINGS AND ENGAGEMENT PERIOD
FOR PUBLIC FEEDBACK WAS HELD
FROM OCTOBER TWENTY THIRD
THROUGH
NOVEMBER TWENTY THIRD
OF TWENTY TWENTY THREE ONE
HUNDRED AND NINETY
THREE
FEEDBACK MESSAGES WERE RECEIVED
THROUGH THE WEBSITE SUBMISSION
SOCIAL MEDIA COMMENTS, EMAILS
AND VOICEMAILS THREE DROP IN
SESSIONS HELP FOR THE PUBLIC AT
THE BLAKE TRANSIT CENTER
YPSILANTI TRANSIT CENTER AND
THE YPSILANTI DISTRICT LIBRARY
BRANCH OF BODDICKER ROAD ONE
HUNDRED SIXTY NINE PEOPLE
STOPPED BY TO PROVIDE US WITH
COMMENTS AT THESE MEETINGS TO
ONLINE MEETINGS WERE ALSO HELD
IN NOVEMBER IN WHICH NINETEEN
PEOPLE ATTENDED.
THE COMMENTS ABOUT THE PLAN
WERE LARGELY POSITIVE WITH
LARGE FOCUS GIVEN ON EXPANDED
SERVICE ON SATURDAYS AND
SUNDAYS.
FEEDBACK WAS ALSO GIVEN TO US
ON AREAS WHERE CURRENT SERVICES
CAN DEFINITELY BE IMPROVED.
A LOT OF THAT FOCUSED ON THINGS
LIKE ON TIME PERFORMANCE,
ABILITY TO MEET TRANSFERS AND
OTHER ISSUES LIKE THAT.
THESE COMMENTS OF FEEDBACK WILL
BE INCORPORATED INTO FUTURE
PLANS WHERE RESOURCES ALLOW.
SO THANK YOU AGAIN FOR GIVING
US THE OPPOSITE OPPORTUNITY TO
PRESENT TO THE COMMISSION AND
WILL NOW TAKE QUESTIONS AND
COMMENTS IF YOU DON'T HAVE
ANYTHING NOW BUT YOU HAVE AN
AWESOME IDEA IN THE SHOWER
THREE PLEASE FEEL FREE TO SEND
US THE MESSAGE PLANNING THAT
THE VIBORG I GET THOSE
PERSONALLY ALONG WITH A COUPLE
MEMBERS OF OUR TEAM SO WILL BE
THE ONES RESPONDING DIRECTLY TO
YOU IF YOU'RE INTERESTED IN
MORE DETAILED INFORMATION
INCLUDING MAPS AND SCHEDULES
AND ALL THAT REALLY COOL STUFF,
IT'S STILL AVAILABLE ONLINE AT
BIT BIT DANTLEY THE RIDE
SERVICES TWENTY TWENTY FOUR
THAT'LL TAKE TO THE SAME LENGTH
THAT CHRISTOPHER PROVIDED IN
THE HOMEWORK.
>> THIS IS JUST A SHORTER
VERSION OF THAT LINK SO
COMMENTS REGARDING THIS SERVICE
PLAN WE WILL ACCEPT THEM FOR
CONSIDERATION THEM INTO THE
FINAL VERSION OF THE PLAN WHERE
THEY'RE FEASIBLE.
THE FINALIZED PLAN WILL BE
INTRODUCED TO THE PUBLIC
BEGINNING IN SPRING 2024 SO
THAT IS ALL I HAVE AND IF
ANYBODY HAS QUESTIONS WE'LL BE
HAPPY TO TAKE THOSE NOW.
THANK YOU SO MUCH, KEN.
IT'S IT'S REALLY EXCITING TO
SEE THAT YOU GUYS ARE ABLE TO
RESPOND TO ALL THE INPUT AND
DESIRE OF THE COMMUNITY AND WE
HAVE THE KNOWLEDGE, THE
RESOURCES AND YOU GUYS ARE
ACTING ON IT.
SO THIS IS GREAT TO SEE.
I KNOW WE WE'VE HEARD A LOT
OF COMMENTS AND TALKED ABOUT
THE IMPROVEMENTS THESE
IMPROVEMENTS ARE MAKING.
SO THIS IS WONDERFUL.
>> BUT HAVE ANY COMMENTS OR
QUESTIONS FOR KEN OR LARRY HAS
HIS HAND UP RIGHT THERE?
>> I WILL THERE BE CHANGES TO
THE ORION SERVICE RIGHT NOW
THERE'S AN INTERNAL DISCUSSION
TAKING PLACE ON ARE THERE TYPES
OF TECHNOLOGY THAT WE CAN
IMPLEMENT TO IMPROVE A RIDE AND
THEN YOU KNOW, SEE IF THERE ARE
WAYS THAT WE CAN OVERHAUL THE
STRUCTURE THERE.
>> BUT AS PART OF THIS PLAN NO
NO CURRENT PLANS TO INTRODUCE
ANY SORT OF CHANGES TO RIDE IN
TWENTY TWENTY FOUR.
>> PETER, HOW ABOUT OTHER
TECHNOLOGY CHANGES OR ANY
OF THOSE BEING FUNDED BY THE
MILITARY?
I'M THINKING OF THINGS LIKE THE
BUS TRACKING SYSTEM AND I LIKE
THAT BECAUSE IT SORT OF HELPS
OUT WHEN WE HAVE SERVICE THAT
ISN'T TOO FREQUENT BEING ABLE
TO KNOW EXACTLY WHEN THE BUS IS
COMING REALLY HELPS OUT WHEN WE
DON'T HAVE OFTEN REALLY
FREQUENT.
>> SO THAT'S THAT'S ANOTHER ONE
WHERE WE ARE LOOKING INTERNALLY
AT DIFFERENT SYSTEMS.
YOU KNOW THAT WE ROLLED OUT THE
TRACK MY BUS SERVICE AT ALL THE
BUS STOP SO THAT PEOPLE COULD
TEXT THAT'S BEEN REALLY, REALLY
HANDY AND PEOPLE RESPONDED TO
IT.
BUT OUR PACKAGE OF TOOLS THAT
WE HAVE ON LINE THOSE ARE
GETTING A LITTLE LONG IN THE
TOOTH SO NOT AS PART OF THIS
SPECIFIC MILLAGE PLAN BUT WE
ARE TRYING TO SEE IF THERE ARE
BETTER TECHNOLOGY PACKAGES OUT
THERE THAT WE CAN IMPLEMENT
GOING FORWARD.
BUT IT'S NOT GOING TO BE PART
OF THE TWENTY TWENTY FOUR PLAN
,RIGHT MOLLY?
>> SAME QUESTION BUT SIGNAL
PRIORITY.
>> YES, THAT ONE I DON'T HAVE
TO GIVE THE TAP DANCE THE
ANSWER ON THAT.
I'M ACTUALLY I'M THE PROJECT
MANAGER FROM THE RIGHT SIDE ON
THAT I'M WORKING CURRENTLY WITH
LOU AND HIS YOU KNOW HIS
TRAFFIC SIGNALS TEAM.
WE ARE IN THE PROCESS RIGHT NOW
OF WRITING OUT THE SOFTWARE
SPECIFICATIONS FOR A SIGNAL
PRIORITY SYSTEM.
SO THE WAY THAT THE PROJECT
GETS BROKEN UP BECAUSE ANDAT IS
FUNDING THE ENTIRE THING GO
THAT IS WE BROKEN IT OUT INTO
PHASE ONE ONE AND TWO.
THE FIRST ONE WAS TO BRING IN
CONSULTANTS TO HELP US WORK OUT
ALL THE TECHNICAL SPECS WE'RE
PRETTY MUCH DONE WITH THAT NOW.
SO PHASE ONE A IS GOING TO BE
WORKING WITH LUKE THE EXECUTE A
CONTRACT WITH THE SOFTWARE
COMPANIES TO BRING THAT
SOFTWARE ONLINE AND DEPLOY IT
OVER THE NEXT.
THE TIMELINE IS SIX TO NINE
MONTHS ON THE WASHTENAW I HAVE
A NEW CORRIDOR AND THEN PHASE
TWO WILL BE ONCE WE'VE TESTED
THAT BROUGHT IT ONLINE AND MAKE
SURE THAT EVERYTHING WORKS.
THESE TWO WILL BE DOING A
SIMILAR THING WITH THE
WASHTENAW COUNTY COMMISSION AND
THEIR SIGNALS DEPARTMENT TO
WORK DOWN THE WASHTENAW AVENUE
CORRIDOR ALL THE WAY TO
YPSILANTI AND THEN LATER ON
ONCE WE IDENTIFY WHAT THE
DIFFERENT TYPES OF FUNDING WILL
BE NEEDED TO ACTIVATE THIS TYPE
OF SYSTEM THAT WE CAN COME UP
WITH ESTIMATES FOR HOW WE CAN
DEPLOY THIS THROUGHOUT THE
ENTIRE CITY AND BEYOND, I'LL
TRY TO KEEP IT NOT SUPER
TECHNICAL BUT IT'S INSTEAD
OF HOOKING UP NEW EQUIPMENT AT
EVERY INTERSECTION, THIS ONE IS
KIND OF IT'S CALLED A BACK DOOR
SOLUTION WHERE WE JUST HOOK UP
THE RIDE'S GPS TO THE CITY'S
EXISTING TRAFFIC SIGNALS
CONTROLLING SOFTWARE SO THAT
WAY WE DON'T HAVE TO GO OUT AND
PLACE EQUIPMENT EVERYWHERE.
SO THEORETICS AT SOME POINT
WILL THAT WE SHOULD BE ABLE TO
GO ANYWHERE.
THE CITY HAS A SIGNAL WE SHOULD
BE ABLE TO TIE INTO THAT THAT'S
SUPER AWESOME AND EXCITING.
DO YOU BY ANY CHANCE HAVE
ESTIMATES AT THIS POINT OF ONE
SIGNAL PRIORITY IS UP AND
RUNNING HOW MUCH TIME IT WILL
SHAVE OFF OF THAT?
THE WASHTENAW EXPRESS BUS
SERVICE SO THE NO, LET ME GIVE
THE MAIN BENEFIT OF THE TRANSIT
SIGNAL TIMING WE'RE GOING TO
HAVE AT THE BEGINNING SINCE
IT'S NOT GOING TO COME AND IT'S
NOT GOING TO HAVE TO JUMP LANES
OR TRANSIT LANES OR ANYTHING
LIKE THAT, IT'S GOING TO BE
MORE CONSISTENCY OF SCHEDULE
AND SO LIKE AT WILL APPEAR
EVERYBODY HERE KNOWS IT
PROBABLY FOUR TO SIX O'CLOCK
EVERY NIGHT GOING OUTBOUND
WASHTENAW YOU KNOW THAT THAT
CAN BE VERY, VERY CHALLENGING
AND IT CAN ADD PROBABLY 10 TO
15 MINUTES DEPENDING ON WHAT
HAPPENS ON TO A TRANSIT
SCHEDULE.
>> SO I CAN'T SAY WE'RE GOING
TO GET TEN TO FIFTEEN MINUTES
BACK BUT THE THOUGHT IS IF WE
CAN MORE PREDICTABLY SAY IT'S
GOING TO TAKE US FORTY MINUTES
TO GET THROUGH THAT CORRIDOR
INSTEAD OF YOU KNOW THIRTY FIVE
MINUTES OR FIFTY MINUTES OR
STUFF LIKE THAT THAT MAY BE
ABLE TO YOU KNOW THEN WE MAY BE
ABLE TO SAY THAT'LL BE A TEN
PERCENT SAVINGS BUT NO I DON'T
KNOW QUITE YET WHAT THAT IS.
>> THAT'S THAT'S REALLY
HELPFUL.
THANK YOU.
OTHER QUESTIONS OR COMMENTS.
>> ALL RIGHT.
WELL THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR
THE PRESENTATION BUT ALSO MORE
SO THANK YOU FOR ACTUALLY DOING
THE WORK AND GETTING ALL THIS
STUFF READY TO GO AND I LOOK
FORWARD TO SEEING IMPLEMENTED
IN APRIL AND AUGUST.
>> WELL, THANK YOU EVERYBODY.
AND LIKE I SAID, IF YOU HAVE
ANY QUESTIONS AT ANY TIME NOT
JUST RELATED TO THIS WE'RE
ALWAYS AVAILABLE AT PLANNING ON
THE RIDE DOG.
SO THANK YOU EVERYBODY.
THANK YOU.
ALL RIGHT.
MOVING ON TO I GUESS I CAN SAY
AGAIN THE ANNUAL CRASH REPORT
BRINGING IT BACK AGAIN.
WE STARTED TO REVIEW THESE
MATERIALS AT A PREVIOUS MEETING
WAS MAYBE SEPTEMBER BUT WE RAN
OUT OF TIME SO THE REININGER IS
BACK AGAIN.
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR COMING
BACK TO PICK UP WHERE SHE LEFT
OFF AND AND CONTINUE HER
PRESENTATION.
I THINK WE'RE GOING TO TRY TO
KEEP IT TO ABOUT A HALF HOUR OR
SO.
SO CYNTHIA, CYNTHIA AND
RAYMOND, I'LL LET YOU GUYS TAKE
IT FROM HERE WITH WHATEVER YOUR
PLANNING ON TRYING TO FIT INTO
THE ALLOTTED TIME.
THANK YOU.
AS YOU'VE STATED, WE ARE BACK
TO DISCUSS THE TWENTY TWENTY
TWO CRASH DENHA AND I WILL
SHARE A SCREEN WITH YOU JUST SO
THAT WE CAN HAVE REMINDERS
ESPECIALLY FOR ANYONE WHO MIGHT
BE VIEWING WHO WAS A PART
OF THE PREVIOUS DISCUSSION.
SO ALL OF OUR CRASH REPORTING
IS AVAILABLE ON THE CITY'S
WEBSITE AND YOU CAN GO INTO THE
CRASH RECORDING AND THERE ARE
THERE'S A DASHBOARD AS WELL AS
THE CRASH MAPS AND I HOPE THAT
CUED UP HERE IF I CAN I CAN
DENHA ZOOM CONTROLS BLOCKING
THIS SCREEN.
>> SO THE FIRST STAGE IS VERY
QUICKLY GOING BACK OVER THE
GENERAL OVERALL TRENDS.
WE SAW A SLIGHT INCREASE IN THE
NUMBER OF CRASHES LAST YEAR BUT
WE'RE STILL BELOW THREE
PANDEMIC LEVELS AND WE'RE STILL
SEEING A DECLINE IN OUR OVERALL
CRASHES.
I HAVE THIS LIMITED TO OUR
CAMPSITE CRASHES SO THOSE ARE
FATAL AND PARTICIPATING INJURY
CRASHES WHERE WE ARE STILL
OPERATING IN A PRETTY STEADY
STATE.
YOU HAVE A BIT OF AN OVERALL
AVERAGE FIVE YEAR AVERAGE AND
YEAR OVER YEAR BUT THOSE ARE
STILL ARE PRETTY STAGGERING
CRASHES AND LOOKING AT WHAT
THOSE OVERALL CRASH TYPES ARE,
WE KNOW THAT WE HAVE
OVER
REPRESENTATION IN OUR
PEDESTRIAN CRASHES AND WE ALSO
NEXT UP WE HAVE TO BICYCLE AND
FIX OBJECT CRASHES.
SO I DID AND THIS IS WHAT THE
MAP LOOKS LIKE FOR THOSE OF YOU
WHO AREN'T FAMILIAR WITH IT.
AND THEN I DID JUST BRING UP
WITH THE MAPPING TOOL WHICH IS
ANOTHER GREAT TOOL TO HELP
UNDERSTAND CRASH DATA.
JUST THESE ARE WHERE ALL OF OUR
SERIOUS AND FATAL INJURIES OVER
TWENTY TWO OCCURRED AND YOU
ALSO HAD IN YOUR PACKET THE
OVER SUMMARY OF ALL OF THE
CRASHES AND INFORMATION ABOUT
EACH OF THOSE SERIOUS CRASHES
THAT OCCURRED IN THE LAST YEAR
AND RECOGNIZING THAT WE DO HAVE
A LIMITED AMOUNT OF TIME THIS
EVENING I DID WANT TO OPEN IT
UP TO THE FLOOR IF THERE ARE
QUESTIONS THAT YOU WOULD LIKE
TO DISCUSS ABOUT THE CRASHES
HAD SOME TIME OF YEAH, THANK
YOU.
SO GIVEN THAT GIVEN THE LAST
FEW MONTHS FOR PEOPLE TO KIND
OF LOOK THROUGH IDENTIFIED
TRENDS OR COME UP WITH WITH
QUESTIONS ABOUT SPECIFIC
CRASHES OR OR TRENDS, ARE THERE
OTHER COMMENTS OR QUESTIONS,
PETER, HAVE WE DO WE HAVE A
DECISION YET ON HOW WE HANDLE
CRASHES THAT INVOLVE SCOOTERS?
WHAT IS THE WHAT IS THE
STANDARD AROUND THAT?
WHERE WOULD I EXPECT THAT WE
WOULD EXPECT SCOOTER CRASHES TO
SHOW UP IN THIS DATA IF WE HAD
ANY IN TWENTY TWENTY TWO?
>> THOSE IS AN EXCELLENT
QUESTION AND IT'S A QUESTION
THAT DOESN'T HAVE THE BEST
ANSWER AT THIS POINT BECAUSE
THE NEW DEMOCRATIC REPORT DOES
NOT HAVE THE ABILITY TO SELECT
SCOOTER AS A AS AN ITEM AND
THAT'S I DON'T KNOW IF THAT
CHANGE IS EXPECTED TO BE MADE
THIS YEAR THIS COMING YEAR OR
NOT.
I KNOW THAT IT WAS NOT MADE IN
TWENTY TWENTY THREE OR CURRENT
.
MY UNDERSTANDING OF READING THE
INSTRUCTION MANUAL FOR THE
INDICATION IS THAT SCOOTER
CRASHES SCOOTER NOT NOT LIKE
EVENTS WITH SCOOTER BUT THE
SMALLER MICRO MOBILITY STYLE
SCOOTERS ARE BEING QUOTED AS
PEDESTRIAN FASHION.
>> OK AND WOULD BE SOMETHING
FOR THE LARGER SLATED OR
POWERLESSLY POLICY LIST SO GOOD
THAT'S A GOOD IDEA TO TO ADD TO
THAT.
THANKS I DO SO ANSWER YOUR
QUESTION PER THE TEN MANUAL A
SCOOTER IS IS KIND OF TRICKY
BECAUSE IF IT HAS A MOTOR IT'S
A MOTOR VEHICLE AND IF IT'S SO
A PERSON ON A MOTORIZED SCOOTER
IS A MOTOR VEHICLE A PERSON ON
A LIKE A RAZOR SCOOTER OR NON
MOTORIZED IS A PEDESTRIAN.
SO IT'S A LITTLE BIT CONFUSING.
WE'RE TRYING TO GET THE MESSAGE
OUT TO OUR FOLKS SO WE CAN
ACCURATELY CAPTURE THOSE
ACCIDENTS.
BUT I KNOW SOME HAVE GOTTEN
MISK IDENTIFIED OK, YEAH IT
WOULD BE GOOD TO GET THAT
FIGURED OUT GOING FORWARD
CONSIDERING THE GROWTH IN THAT
AND THE SCOOTERS AND SCOOTER
USE BUT THE RENTAL KIND AND THE
THE PERSONAL PERSONALLY OWNED
DEVICES.
>> THANK YOU.
LIKE BIKES I ASSUME ARE JUST
BICYCLE IS IT.
IT'S HARDER TO TELL WHETHER OR
NOT IT EVEN IS ME BIKE.
I'M SORRY THOSE WOULD ALL BE
CLASSIFIED AS BICYCLE IS EVEN
FATHOM MOTOR AGAIN THAT'S
ANOTHER I'M A LITTLE BIT
AMBIGUOUS IF ANYTHING WITH THE
MOTORS AND MOTOR VEHICLE FOR
THE CURRENT YUDKIN GUIDELINES
SO BICYCLE OR ANY PEDALING OR
ANY DEVICE IT'S PEDAL
REGARDLESS OF THE NUMBER
OF WHEELS IS CONSIDERED A
BICYCLE UNICYCLE BICYCLE
TRICYCLE RECYCLE ARE ALL A
BICYCLE ON CAN BUT IT'S GOT A
MOTOR BECOMES A MOTOR VEHICLE.
SOMEONE ON A HORSE IS
PEDESTRIAN.
I DIDN'T MAKE I DIDN'T MAKE IT
UP BUT THAT'S THE WAY IT IS
WRITTEN.
INTERESTING.
YEAH BECAUSE THERE COULD BE
DIFFERENT INTERPRETATIONS OF IF
THE OFFICER DOESN'T EVEN NOTICE
THAT IT HAS IT'S AN E BIKE OR
IF THEY LIKE OH THIS IS BIKE
THAT'S A MOTOR VEHICLE THAT CAN
BE DIFFERENT INTERPRETATIONS
OF EXACTLY INFORMATION OTHER
COMMENTS OR QUESTIONS ON THE
CRASH REPORT WHAT PEOPLE ARE
THINKING.
I WANTED TO ASK SOMETHING I
THINK A WEEK OR TWO TO GO THERE
IS A REPORT OUT I THINK AT THE
NATIONAL LEVEL ABOUT TIME
OF DAY CRASHES AND I THINK THE
NUMBER WAS SOMETHING LIKE FORTY
TWO PERCENT INCREASE IN CRASHES
THAT YOU KNOW, IN DARK
CONDITIONS WHILE DAYLIGHT HOURS
THE CRASHES WERE PRETTY STEADY
.
DO WE HAVE DATA ON THAT?
IS THAT SOMETHING THAT WE'RE
SEEING IN ANN ARBOR GENERALLY
SPEAKING NOW OUR DATA SO WE
LOOK AT OUR PORRO THESE ARE
REPORTED AS A FIVE YEAR SO I DO
NOT HAVE IT BROKEN DOWN EXACTLY
.
OR OR THE FIVE YEAR FIVE ARE
ARE LIGHTING CONDITIONS VERSUS
OUR DARK CONDITIONS OR FOR OUR
SERIOUS INJURY CRASHES ARE
GENERALLY TRENDING TOWARD MORE
THAN HAPPY HAPPENING IN THE
DAYLIGHT AS WAS AS WE HAVE IN
THE PACK YOU CAN SEE THEY ARE
BOUSE SPLIT BY WOULD ACTUALLY
GIVE ME JUST A BOLíVAR LITVACK
.
SO LUNINE OF OUR TWENTY FIVE
CRASHES OCCURRED IN OUR
CONDITION SO THAT'S STICKING
CLOSE TO THAT THAT TREND THAT
WE'VE NOTICED IN YOUR EARLIER.
>> SO OK SO THE THING IS ON THE
DASHBOARD IS A TOTAL CUMULATIVE
OVER FIVE YEARS WE DON'T WE
DON'T HAVE THAT THE THE BAR
CHART THAT YOU WERE SHOWING IS
A CUMULATIVE OVER FIVE YEARS
FROM TWENTY TWENTY THREE POINT
FOUR TO THE YEAH.
AS WE'RE REPORTING CRASHES
WE'RE REPORTING THE TRENDS.
RIGHT.
THOSE THERE'S A FIVE YEAR
AVERAGE SO THE ORALS HAVE
ALWAYS BEEN REPORTED AS THE
MOST SURVIVORS.
>> OK, BUT ONE OF THE THAT'S TO
GIVE US ENOUGH DATA POINTS TO
REALLY START TO UNDERSTAND
CONDITIONS OVER TIME.
SO IN THE FUTURE WE MIGHT HAVE
A BETTER YEAR TO YEAR
UNDERSTANDING OF MOVEMENTS
TREND THE TRENDS MOVING BETWEEN
DAY AND NIGHT OR NOT OR
WHATEVER.
>> YEAH, THEY TEND TO BE VERY
STABLE OVER TIME AND THAT'S ONE
OF THE REASONS THE REAL
PORTIMAO IS THE MOST RECENT
FIVE YEARS DEFINITELY ALSO GIVE
US SOME DATA POINTS TO REALLY
THINK ABOUT IN UNDERSTANDING
WHAT I'M TRYING TO BE.
>> OK AND CINDY IS IT FAIR TO
SAY I WAS JUST KIND OF QUERYING
OUR CASH BOARD AS WELL?
>> IT LOOKS LIKE THE THE
HIGHEST CRASH RATE IS REALLY
OCCURRING AT THE PEAK BOTH IN
TERMS AND SO THAT IN ORDER TO
REALLY UNDERSTAND LIGHTING
CONDITIONS IN CAMP, THE
FUNCTION OF THINGS RIGHT THIS
TIME OF YEAR MIGHT BE DARK
OTHER TIMES OF THE YEAR PEAK
MIGHT BE LIGHT AND THEN SO YOU
KNOW AND THEN ALSO KNOWING LIKE
WHAT THE WEATHER CONDITIONS ARE
ALSO AFFECTS HOW LIGHT IT IS
AND THINGS LIKE THAT.
>> IT IS A FIELD CORRECT ME IF
I'M WRONG BOTH CYNTHY AND I'M
SURE THAT IT IS A FIELD ON THE
TEN BUT AGAIN THE CONSISTENCY
WITH WHICH THAT'S REPORTED OUT
MIGHT FLUCTUATE AS WELL.
>> SO LIGHTING CONDITIONS IN
OTHER WORDS THE LIGHTING
CONDITIONS ARE TYPICALLY
RECORDED.
>> SO THAT DOES TEND TO BE A
PRETTY PRETTY STABLE CONDITION.
BUT AS YOU SAID IN VERSUS TIME
A DAY WITH THE GAS SMALLER DATA
SET TRENDS ARE A LITTLE BIT
OF TIME MOLIK.
BUT JUST BECAUSE I REMEMBER WE
DUG INTO TIME TO THE LIGHTING
CONDITIONS IN PAST YEARS AND
HISTORICALLY MOST OF OUR
CRASHES ARE HAPPENING IN LIGHT
CONDITIONS.
SO I I DON'T KNOW LIKE WHAT
THIS I HAVEN'T DUG IN ON THIS
YEAR BUT IN GENERAL IN THE PAST
YEARS WE'VE ACTUALLY NOT
MATCHED THAT NATIONAL TREND AND
MOST OF THE CRASHES HAVE BEEN
DURING DAYLIGHT.
I THINK THE TRENDS ARE ALSO THE
MOST CRASHES ARE DAYLIGHT IN
GENERAL.
IT'S JUST THE
INCREASE IN
CRASHES OVERALL IN THE LAST
COUPLE YEARS ACCORDING TO THAT
I THINK IS NEAR TIMES IS PRETTY
MUCH ENTIRELY ACCOUNTED FOR AN
INCREASE AT NIGHTTIME.
SO I JUST WASN'T SURE IF THAT
WAS SOMETHING BUT YEAH, I WOULD
EXPECT THE MOST JUST BY RAW
NUMBER TO BE DURING THE DAY BUT
OK.
>> YEAH AND FORTUNATELY THE
SAMPLE SIZE IS FAIRLY SMALL SO
IT'S HARD TO MAKE CONCLUSIONS
YEAR OVER YEAR HERE IN ANN
ARBOR BUT TO FOLLOW UP ON
COMMISSIONER KLEIMAN'S COMMENTS
YES THAT HAS BEEN AN HISTORIC
TREND THAT CONTINUES TO BE OUR
HISTORIC AND THAT IS NOT
CONSISTENT WITH THE NATIONAL
TREND.
RIGHT, PETER?
THE THE DASHBOARD THAT WE
MAINTAIN I THINK IS A REALLY
GOOD TOOL.
SO I THINK THAT'S SOMETHING
WE'RE DOING A VERY GOOD JOB
THAT IS SHOWING THIS AGGREGATE
SUMMARY DATA.
UM, UH I GUESS THE OTHER
OBSERVATION I WANTED TO MAKE
ABOUT TRENDS THOUGH IN ANN
ARBOR IS THAT THE THE OVERALL
TREND IS GOING SLIGHTLY DOWN IN
A GOOD WAY.
BUT WHEN YOU WHEN YOU TAKE OUT
MOTOR VEHICLE CRASHES FROM THAT
YOU'RE LOOKING AT SERIOUS,
SERIOUS AND FATAL INJURIES IF
YOU'RE ONLY LOOKING AT
VULNERABLE ROAD USERS, THE
TREND IS REALLY NOT GOOD.
SO I ENCOURAGE PEOPLE TO GO ON
TO THE DASHBOARD AND TO LOOK AT
YOU.
YOU CAN SORT OUT BY PEDESTRIAN
AND BICYCLE AND MOTOR VEHICLE
AND YOU WILL SEE THAT WHEN IT
COMES TO PEDESTRIANS AND
BICYCLES WE ARE NOT DOING GOOD
AT THIS POINT AT REDUCING THE
NUMBER OF SERIOUS INJURIES.
THAT'S A PLACE WHERE I THINK WE
NEED TO BE FOCUSING AND
HOPEFULLY THAT WILL BE
REFLECTED IN OUR WORK PLAN AND
OUR WORK ON THE ON THE CRASH
RESPONSE PROTOCOL NEXT YEAR
.
AGREED THIS THIS IS WHAT THEY
TOO ARE BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN
,SERIOUS AND FATAL CRASHES AND
YOU KNOW, AS AS CULTURAL
INDICATED WE'RE IN A VERY
STABLE PATTERN COVERING BETWEEN
ELEVEN AND TWELVE SLIGHT UPTICK
IN TWENTY TWENTY TWO OVER THE
LAST TWO YEARS, A SIMILAR LEVEL
TO WHAT WE EXPERIENCED IN EACH
ONE AND SO THEY ARE STABLE
CRASHES AREN'T INCREASING IN
THOSE CRASHES BUT THEY ARE
STUBBORN AND WE ARE NOT
DECREASING AT THIS POINT AND
OUR THERE I GUESS I'LL ALSO ADD
THAT LOOKING BACK THROUGH THE
REPORT, THE REPORTS IN THE CITY
ADMINISTRATOR REPORT ON BICYCLE
AND PEDESTRIAN CRASHES IN
TWENTY TWENTY THREE THAT TWENTY
TWENTY TWO DATA POINT IS NOT AN
ANOMALY.
TWENTY TWENTY THREE IS GOING TO
BE EVEN WORSE THINK SO THAT
THAT SAME LIKE THAT SAME UPWARD
TREND THAT WE SEE IN TWENTY
TWENTY TWO EYE ROLLING AVERAGE
IS GOING TO INCREASE IN TWENTY
TWENTY THREE AS WELL
.
>> WE WILL SEE WHAT THE SURVEY
DATA COMES OUT.
I THINK THAT IS AN AREA WHERE
WE ARE DEFINITELY WORKING THE
ENGINEERING SIDE OF THIS AND
WHERE WE HAVE SOME INITIATIVES
THE NEXT YEAR THAT IT'S GOING
TO BE INTERESTING TO SEE HOW
THOSE CONTINUE TO ENACT CHANGE
IN CRASHES OVER
MANY OF THOSE
INITIATIVES.
THE LIKE WE SHOULD SURE OR I
WANTED TO GIVE YOU THE
OPPORTUNITY DISCUSS ANY
RESPONSES THAT YEAH, I WE DON'T
CHASE EVERY CRASH AND
NECESSARILY MAKE AN ENGINEERING
RESPONSE BUT ARE THERE ANY THAT
WE THOUGHT WERE WORTH SHARING?
BOY, CINDY SPECULATE HERE.
I SUSPECT YOU'RE JUST SPEAKING
TO JUST KIND OF A GLOBAL
APPROACH TO OUR WORK.
RIGHT?
SO WE HAVE THE SPEED MANAGEMENT
PROGRAM FIRST AND FOREMOST THE
IDEA BEING THAT SPEED BEING THE
LEADING INDICATOR OF SEVERITY
OF CRASHES.
>> WE'RE REALLY INTERESTED IN
WATCHING THAT PROGRAM THIS
COMING YEAR WE HAVE THE FUNDING
WITH SAFE STREETS FOR ALL IF WE
GET THE CONTRACT EXECUTED,
HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION, YOU
KNOW, SO WE HAVE THAT WE HAVE
OBVIOUSLY WE'RE TAKING THE
TRAFFIC COMING RESOLUTION VERY
SERIOUSLY.
THAT COUNCIL PASSED AT YOUR
ENCOURAGEMENT.
SO WE ARE LOOKING AT ALL KINDS
OF OPPORTUNITIES TO INCORPORATE
TRAFFIC COMING INTO CAPITAL
PROJECTS.
SO THOSE ARE REAL TANGIBLE
THINGS RIGHT ON THE ONSET WE
HAVE A WHOLE HOST OF CROSSWALK
IMPROVEMENTS.
WE OBVIOUSLY HEARD FROM
SPEAKERS TONIGHT ABOUT
CROSSWALKS DESIGN IS ONGOING
RIGHT NOW WITH CROSSWALKS ON
JACKSON AND A WHOLE BUNCH
OF OTHER PLACES SUCCESSFUL
SIGNALS.
SO YOU KNOW, IT'S A
MULTIFACETED APPROACH TRYING TO
KIND OF CHIP AWAY AT THIS AND
BRING THOSE NUMBERS DOWN AND
THEN WE HAVE OTHER INITIATIVES
IN THE PLANNING PHASE THAT IN
THEORY WILL YIELD RESULTS AS
WELL.
>> THE DOWNTOWN AREA
CIRCULATION STUDY AND THEN THE
THE ROAD RESOLUTION COUNCIL
PASSED.
WE PUT TOGETHER A BUDGET
REQUEST FOR THAT SO THAT WILL
BE PART OF THAT BUDGET
DISCUSSION AS WELL.
SO SO YEAH, I THINK JUST ALL
THESE THINGS IN TOTALITY ARE
MEANT TO KIND OF SYSTEMATICALLY
TRY TO ADDRESS THOSE STUBBORN
NUMBERS AND YOU KNOW, USE THE
WORD STUBBORN APPROPRIATELY
BECAUSE YOU KNOW, WE'VE WE'VE
BEEN DOING A LOT THERE'S STILL
A LOT MORE THAT NEEDS TO BE
DONE.
>> YEAH, I APPRECIATE AND THINK
IT'S PROPER THAT WE'RE TAKING A
BIG PICTURE CITYWIDE RESPONSE
RESPONSE TO THE STATE OF THINGS
AND WE CAN WE CAN PLAY WHACK A
MOLE AND AND PERHAPS THERE ARE
THERE ARE CASES WHERE THERE ARE
REAL NOTED ISSUES WITH WITH
DESIGN OR ENGINEERING OR
CONDITIONS AND I KNOW THE CITY
RESPONSE WHEN THERE ARE
CONDITIONS AND THINGS THAT
COULD LEAD TO OR HAVE LED TO
CRASHES.
BUT YOU KNOW, I THINK IT'S BEST
THAT WE IMPLEMENT PROCESSA AND
RESOLUTIONS AND DIRECT CITY AND
COUNCIL TO TO MAKE CHANGE AND
MAKE ACTION AT A CITYWIDE LEVEL
.
YEAH, OTHER QUESTIONS OR
COMMENTS ON THE CRASH REPORTS
TO CIVICS OR THE TRENDS OR THE
REPORT ITSELF.
>> I THINK AND THAT IS THAT IN
THE HOMEWORK THE HOMEWORK, THE
PACKET ITEM THAT YOU RECEIVE
THERE'S ALL OF THOSE FOCUS
AREAS ON THE PLAN ARE
IDENTIFIED AND THOSE ARE ALL
TIED BACK DIRECTLY TO ITEMS
THAT ARE REPORTED IN THE MEDIA
CAN AND I THINK IT'S REALLY
IMPORTANT YOU ACKNOWLEDGE THAT
ACROSS THIS ONE YEAR OF DATA
THE MOST SIGNIFICANT
CONTRIBUTOR TO THESE CRASHES
WERE FAILURES KNOW AND THOSE
ARE ACROSS A WIDE VARIETY
OF TYPES OF INTERSECTIONS AND
SIGNALIZED INTERSECTIONS,
UNCIVILIZED INTERSECTIONS VERY
KIELCE INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE IN
CROSSWALKS AND A FAILURE TO GO
ON TO OTHER MOTORISTS.
SO THAT IS THAT IS A REALLY
SIGNIFICANT TREND THAT I DON'T
WANT TO GO UNACKNOWLEDGED.
>> PETER, WHAT WHAT SHOULD WE
BE TAKING AWAY FROM THE FACT
THAT FAILURE TO YIELD IS IS
SUCH A BIG CONTRIBUTOR?
WELL, I THINK THERE ARE SEVERAL
THINGS THAT WE CAN TAKE AWAY.
THE FIRST AND FOREMOST IS THAT
THIS BEHAVIOR TYPE IS HAPPENING
ACROSS A WIDE VARIETY
OF GEOMETRIC CONDITIONS,
INTERSECTION CONTROL CONDITIONS
AND THERE'S THERE IS A
BEHAVIORAL COMPONENT TO THAT.
I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT TO
ACKNOWLEDGE THAT BECAUSE AS
ENGINEERS AND PLANNERS AND
IMPLEMENTERS OF INFRASTRUCTURE
,THAT BEHAVIORAL COMPONENT IS
NOT SOMETHING THAT WE ARE GOING
TO BE ABLE TO ADDRESS AS THERE
ARE CHANGES THAT CAN BE MADE TO
THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT TO
ENCOURAGE THAT BETTER BEHAVIOR
AND THAT ENCOURAGE SPACE
SEPARATION TIME SEPARATION.
THOSE ARE BOTH THINGS THAT WE
LOOK AT THAT THERE ARE A LOT
OF CRASHES IN THIS DATA SET
THAT ARE THAT HAVE CONDITIONS
WHERE THAT'S NOT ALWAYS
SOMETIMES
INFRASTRUCTURE
ELEMENTS ARE THERE AND VOTERS
ARE STILL CHOOSING TO DO AS
THEY CAN AND THAT'S THAT'S
SOMETHING THAT IS NOT ALWAYS
ABLE TO BE EFFECTIVE BY MOLLY.
READING BETWEEN THE LINES, WHAT
I'M HEARING IS THAT DRIVERS ARE
GETTING WORSE AND THAT PERHAPS
WE NEED TO REDUCE THE PLACES
WHERE THEY'RE ALLOWED TO BE IF
WE WANT TO LIKE THAT THAT IF WE
WANT TO REDUCE THIS KIND
OF BEHAVIOR MAYBE WE NEED TO
CONSIDER MORE PEDESTRIAN
CROSSING AND JUST REMOVE
DRIVERS FROM THE EQUATION IF
THEY'RE NOT GOING TO BEHAVE
THEMSELVES
.
OTHER COMMENTS, OTHER QUESTIONS
>> ALL RIGHT.
WELL, CYNTHIA, THANK YOU FOR
COMING BACK.
I'M SORRY WE WEREN'T ABLE TO
FIT THIS INTO THE THE NORMAL
SEPTEMBER MEETING AUGUST
WHATEVER IT WAS.
BUT THANKS FOR COMING BACK AND
ENTERTAINING YOUR QUESTIONS AND
COMMENTS AND YEAH, WE WILL SEE
THIS TOPIC I THINK IN AUGUST OR
SEPTEMBER OF NEXT YEAR.
ALL RIGHT.
LET'S SEE.
MOVING ON TO THE ANNUAL REPORT
ALL RIGHT.
EVERY YEAR STAFF HELPS US
MOVING ON TO THE ANNUAL REPORT
PRODUCE A REPORT WHICH PROVIDES
EVERY YEAR STAFF HELPS US
AN OVERVIEW OF OUR
PRODUCE A REPORT WHICH PROVIDES
ACCOMPLISHMENTS OF THE YEAR.
AN OVERVIEW OF OUR
I INCLUDED IN THE PACKET IS THE
ACCOMPLISHMENTS OF THE YEAR.
FIRST DRAFT OF THE REPORT FOR
I INCLUDED IN THE PACKET IS THE
TWENTY TWENTY THREE RAYMOND
FIRST DRAFT OF THE REPORT FOR
WILL GIVE AN OVERVIEW AND AND
TWENTY TWENTY THREE RAYMOND
SEE IF THERE'S ANY FEEDBACK
WILL GIVE AN OVERVIEW AND AND
BEFORE WE FINALIZE IT IN
SEE IF THERE'S ANY FEEDBACK
JANUARY.
BEFORE WE FINALIZE IT IN
RAYMOND, THANK YOU AND SHARE MY
JANUARY.
SCREEN.
RAYMOND, THANK YOU AND SHARE MY
I'LL WALK YOU THROUGH IT.
SCREEN.
SO YES BRETT MENTIONED WE
I'LL WALK YOU THROUGH IT.
PRODUCE THIS EVERY YEAR.
SO YES BRETT MENTIONED WE
IT'S REALLY MEANT TO HIGHLIGHT
PRODUCE THIS EVERY YEAR.
THE ACCOMPLISHMENTS OF THIS
IT'S REALLY MEANT TO HIGHLIGHT
COMMISSION TALK ABOUT ALL THE
THE ACCOMPLISHMENTS OF THIS
DIFFERENT SUBJECTS THAT YOU'VE
COMMISSION TALK ABOUT ALL THE
TALKED ABOUT OVER THE PAST YEAR
DIFFERENT SUBJECTS THAT YOU'VE
AND THE MOTIONS AND THINGS THAT
TALKED ABOUT OVER THE PAST YEAR
YOU VOTED ON AND THEN WE POST
AND THE MOTIONS AND THINGS THAT
THIS ON YOUR WEBSITE.
YOU VOTED ON AND THEN WE POST
WE PROVIDE IT TO CITY COUNCIL
THIS ON YOUR WEBSITE.
AS WELL TO KIND OF JUST
WE PROVIDE IT TO CITY COUNCIL
ILLUSTRATE ALL THE GOOD WORK
AS WELL TO KIND OF JUST
THAT WE DO.
ILLUSTRATE ALL THE GOOD WORK
>> WE ARE FOLLOWING THE SAME
THAT WE DO.
TEMPLATE.
>> WE ARE FOLLOWING THE SAME
LAST YEAR WE DIDN'T DO ANY
TEMPLATE.
MAJOR OVERHAUL TO THE KIND
LAST YEAR WE DIDN'T DO ANY
OF LOOK IN THE FEEL OF THE
MAJOR OVERHAUL TO THE KIND
DOCUMENTS BUT WE'RE ALWAYS
OF LOOK IN THE FEEL OF THE
WELCOME WELCOME SUGGESTIONS IN
DOCUMENTS BUT WE'RE ALWAYS
THAT SPACE.
WELCOME WELCOME SUGGESTIONS IN
ADMITTEDLY WE SOMETIMES AREN'T
THAT SPACE.
AS TECHNICALLY SAVVY WHEN IT
ADMITTEDLY WE SOMETIMES AREN'T
COMES TO GRAPHICS AND THINGS
AS TECHNICALLY SAVVY WHEN IT
LIKE THAT.
COMES TO GRAPHICS AND THINGS
SO WE DO THE BEST WE CAN SO WE
LIKE THAT.
START OFF WITH AN AT A GLANCE
SO WE DO THE BEST WE CAN SO WE
KIND OF THESE DIFFERENT TOPICS
START OFF WITH AN AT A GLANCE
THAT HAVE BEEN DISCUSSED, THE
KIND OF THESE DIFFERENT TOPICS
DIFFERENT LOGISTICS OF HOW MANY
THAT HAVE BEEN DISCUSSED, THE
MEETINGS, HOW MANY COMMITTEE
DIFFERENT LOGISTICS OF HOW MANY
MEMBERS THERE ARE, HOW MANY OR
MEETINGS, HOW MANY COMMITTEE
HOW MANY COMMISSION MEMBERS
MEMBERS THERE ARE, HOW MANY OR
THERE ARE ANY SUBCOMMITTEES
HOW MANY COMMISSION MEMBERS
THERE ARE SUBCOMMITTEE MEETINGS
THERE ARE ANY SUBCOMMITTEES
SO FORTH AND SO ON HOW MANY
THERE ARE SUBCOMMITTEE MEETINGS
PUBLIC COMMUNICATIONS WE'VE
SO FORTH AND SO ON HOW MANY
GOTTEN AND HAVE BEEN SHARED
PUBLIC COMMUNICATIONS WE'VE
WITH YOU ALL AND THEN WE TALK
GOTTEN AND HAVE BEEN SHARED
ABOUT THE MAKEUP OF THE
WITH YOU ALL AND THEN WE TALK
COMMISSION.
ABOUT THE MAKEUP OF THE
I WILL SAY IF PEOPLE TRANSITION
COMMISSION.
THROUGHOUT THE YEAR WE STILL
I WILL SAY IF PEOPLE TRANSITION
LIST THEM EVEN IF THEY ONLY
THROUGHOUT THE YEAR WE STILL
SERVED A PARTIAL YEAR.
LIST THEM EVEN IF THEY ONLY
SO SOME NAMES THAT YOU MAY MISS
SERVED A PARTIAL YEAR.
OR FOLKS THAT YOU SEE ON THE
SO SOME NAMES THAT YOU MAY MISS
COMMISSION THAT YOU MISS ARE
OR FOLKS THAT YOU SEE ON THE
STILL HERE AND THEN EVEN SOME
COMMISSION THAT YOU MISS ARE
OF OUR NEW MEMBERS ARE ON HERE
STILL HERE AND THEN EVEN SOME
AS WELL.
OF OUR NEW MEMBERS ARE ON HERE
SO WE JUST WANT TO AGAIN GIVE
AS WELL.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS TO EVERYBODY
SO WE JUST WANT TO AGAIN GIVE
WHO'S SERVED ON COMMISSION AS A
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS TO EVERYBODY
REMINDER WE WILL HAVE KIND
WHO'S SERVED ON COMMISSION AS A
OF AN INTRODUCTORY PASSAGE FROM
REMINDER WE WILL HAVE KIND
A CHAIR.
OF AN INTRODUCTORY PASSAGE FROM
RIGHT.
A CHAIR.
HOW TOMOKI WILL BE HERE
RIGHT.
OBVIOUSLY STAFF IS ALWAYS HERE
HOW TOMOKI WILL BE HERE
TO SUPPORT AND HELP IN ANY WAY
OBVIOUSLY STAFF IS ALWAYS HERE
THAT YOU NEED BRETZ SO FEEL
TO SUPPORT AND HELP IN ANY WAY
FREE, REACH OUT.
THAT YOU NEED BRETZ SO FEEL
THEN WE GO THROUGH MOTIONS AND
FREE, REACH OUT.
SO THE IDEA IS THIS DOESN'T
THEN WE GO THROUGH MOTIONS AND
INCLUDE MEETING AGENDA AND
SO THE IDEA IS THIS DOESN'T
MINUTE APPROVAL SINCE THAT IS
INCLUDE MEETING AGENDA AND
PRETTY PERFUNCTORY HAPPENS
MINUTE APPROVAL SINCE THAT IS
EVERY MEETING.
PRETTY PERFUNCTORY HAPPENS
SO REALLY IT'S JUST ABOUT ANY
EVERY MEETING.
OF THE OTHER ACTIONS THAT THE
SO REALLY IT'S JUST ABOUT ANY
COMMISSION TOOK AND WE KIND
OF THE OTHER ACTIONS THAT THE
OF GO THROUGH UNLESS THOSE OUT
COMMISSION TOOK AND WE KIND
A MEETING BY MEETING ONLY ONE
OF GO THROUGH UNLESS THOSE OUT
MEETING YOU DIDN'T HAVE ANY
A MEETING BY MEETING ONLY ONE
FORMAL ACTIONS.
MEETING YOU DIDN'T HAVE ANY
IT WAS IN APRIL.
FORMAL ACTIONS.
BUT EVERY OTHER MEETING YOU DID
IT WAS IN APRIL.
AND YOU KIND SEE A LOT OF THE
BUT EVERY OTHER MEETING YOU DID
PROGRESS MADE ON TRAFFIC
AND YOU KIND SEE A LOT OF THE
CALMING AND OTHER THINGS THAT
PROGRESS MADE ON TRAFFIC
WERE BROUGHT BEFORE THE
CALMING AND OTHER THINGS THAT
COMMISSION.
WERE BROUGHT BEFORE THE
THEN WE ALSO MOVE ON TO THE
COMMISSION.
DIFFERENT FILES THAT WERE
THEN WE ALSO MOVE ON TO THE
PRESENTED TO THE COMMISSION.
DIFFERENT FILES THAT WERE
WE JUST GO THROUGH UNLESS THOSE
PRESENTED TO THE COMMISSION.
OUT AND PROVIDE THE FILE I.D.
WE JUST GO THROUGH UNLESS THOSE
THE FILE I.D. EVEN THOUGH THIS
OUT AND PROVIDE THE FILE I.D.
DOESN'T LOOK LIKE A VERY
THE FILE I.D. EVEN THOUGH THIS
INTERESTING NUMBER, WHAT IT
DOESN'T LOOK LIKE A VERY
ALLOWS YOU TO DO IS GO INTO THE
INTERESTING NUMBER, WHAT IT
CITY'S ONLINE PORTAL WHICH IS
ALLOWS YOU TO DO IS GO INTO THE
CALLED LEDGER START AND YOU CAN
CITY'S ONLINE PORTAL WHICH IS
TYPE THAT FILE ID AND THEN
CALLED LEDGER START AND YOU CAN
THOSE FILES WILL POP RIGHT UP.
TYPE THAT FILE ID AND THEN
SO THAT'S IF YOU'RE EVER TRYING
THOSE FILES WILL POP RIGHT UP.
TO FIND A DOCUMENT SAYING HEY,
SO THAT'S IF YOU'RE EVER TRYING
WHEN DID WE TALK ABOUT SIDEWALK
TO FIND A DOCUMENT SAYING HEY,
GAP PRIVATIZATION?
WHEN DID WE TALK ABOUT SIDEWALK
YOU CAN JUST QUICKLY GO INTO
GAP PRIVATIZATION?
THE ONLINE PORTAL AND TYPE IN
YOU CAN JUST QUICKLY GO INTO
THE FILE AND YOU SHOULD GET TO
THE ONLINE PORTAL AND TYPE IN
IT RIGHT AWAY.
THE FILE AND YOU SHOULD GET TO
AND SO AGAIN WE JUST KIND OF GO
IT RIGHT AWAY.
THROUGH ALL THE DIFFERENT
AND SO AGAIN WE JUST KIND OF GO
THINGS THAT YOU ALL REVIEWED.
THROUGH ALL THE DIFFERENT
AS YOU CAN SEE, WE HAVE SOME
THINGS THAT YOU ALL REVIEWED.
PLACEHOLDERS FOR DECEMBER.
AS YOU CAN SEE, WE HAVE SOME
THE REPORT IS NOT YET DONE
PLACEHOLDERS FOR DECEMBER.
BECAUSE WE REFLECT THE WORKINGS
THE REPORT IS NOT YET DONE
OF TONIGHT INTO THE REPORT.
BECAUSE WE REFLECT THE WORKINGS
SO WE'LL BRING BACK A FINAL
OF TONIGHT INTO THE REPORT.
DRAFT IN JANUARY FOR YOU THEN
SO WE'LL BRING BACK A FINAL
WE ALWAYS LIKE TO INCLUDE THE
DRAFT IN JANUARY FOR YOU THEN
ORDINANCE JUST AS A REMINDER
WE ALWAYS LIKE TO INCLUDE THE
ABOUT WHAT THE CHARGES AND MAKE
ORDINANCE JUST AS A REMINDER
UP IS OF THE TRANSPORTATION
ABOUT WHAT THE CHARGES AND MAKE
COMMISSION'S THAT'S INCLUDED AS
UP IS OF THE TRANSPORTATION
WELL.
COMMISSION'S THAT'S INCLUDED AS
>> AND THEN WE CLOSE THE REPORT
WELL.
WITH A THANK YOU AND THEN ALSO
>> AND THEN WE CLOSE THE REPORT
A GUEST PASSAGE FROM A
WITH A THANK YOU AND THEN ALSO
COMMISSION AND THIS IS A MOMENT
A GUEST PASSAGE FROM A
I'D LIKE TO SEE IF WE HAVE A
COMMISSION AND THIS IS A MOMENT
VOLUNTEER.
I'D LIKE TO SEE IF WE HAVE A
I THINK I TAKE THIS UP IN THE
VOLUNTEER.
LAST MEETING OR MAYBE EVEN THE
I THINK I TAKE THIS UP IN THE
MEETING BEFORE ASKING YOU ALL
LAST MEETING OR MAYBE EVEN THE
TO MAYBE CONSIDER IF ONE OF YOU
MEETING BEFORE ASKING YOU ALL
WANTS TO BE A GUEST AUTHOR FOR
TO MAYBE CONSIDER IF ONE OF YOU
THE SORT OF CLOSE OUT OF THE
WANTS TO BE A GUEST AUTHOR FOR
REPORT SO THAT IS THE REPORT IN
THE SORT OF CLOSE OUT OF THE
ITS CURRENT STAGE.
REPORT SO THAT IS THE REPORT IN
LIKE I SAID, IT'S STILL DRAFT
ITS CURRENT STAGE.
WILL BRING BACK A MORE POLISHED
LIKE I SAID, IT'S STILL DRAFT
VERSION NEXT MONTH INCLUSIVE
WILL BRING BACK A MORE POLISHED
OF EVERYTHING THAT YOU SEE
VERSION NEXT MONTH INCLUSIVE
MISSING HERE.
OF EVERYTHING THAT YOU SEE
AND ONE OF THING I WANT TO
MISSING HERE.
MENTION IS TONIGHT I WOULD LIKE
AND ONE OF THING I WANT TO
TO TAKE A SCREEN CAPTURE OF US
MENTION IS TONIGHT I WOULD LIKE
SO THAT WE CAN PUT THAT IN THE
TO TAKE A SCREEN CAPTURE OF US
REPORT AS WELL.
SO THAT WE CAN PUT THAT IN THE
SO IN A MOMENT OR SO I WILL ASK
REPORT AS WELL.
YOU ALL TO TURN YOUR CAMERAS ON
SO IN A MOMENT OR SO I WILL ASK
AND SMILE FOR US AND THEN WE'LL
YOU ALL TO TURN YOUR CAMERAS ON
JUST TAKE A SCREEN CAPTURE AND
AND SMILE FOR US AND THEN WE'LL
WE'LL POST THAT OR PIECE THAT
JUST TAKE A SCREEN CAPTURE AND
INTO THE REPORT.
WE'LL POST THAT OR PIECE THAT
>> SO WHILE YOU ALL THINK ABOUT
INTO THE REPORT.
WHO IS GOING TO BE THE LUCKY
>> SO WHILE YOU ALL THINK ABOUT
PERSON TO PROVIDE A GUEST
WHO IS GOING TO BE THE LUCKY
PASSAGE, I'LL JUST SEE IF THERE
PERSON TO PROVIDE A GUEST
ARE ANY OTHER SUGGESTIONS
PASSAGE, I'LL JUST SEE IF THERE
RECOMMENDATIONS, THOUGHTS OR
ARE ANY OTHER SUGGESTIONS
ANYTHING ELSE THAT YOU'D LIKE
RECOMMENDATIONS, THOUGHTS OR
TO SEE IN THE REPORT OR IF YOU
ANYTHING ELSE THAT YOU'D LIKE
WERE HEADED IN THE RIGHT
TO SEE IN THE REPORT OR IF YOU
DIRECTION AND THEN WE CAN TAKE
WERE HEADED IN THE RIGHT
THE PICTURE AND THEN SEE IF
DIRECTION AND THEN WE CAN TAKE
SOMEBODY IS WILLING TO WRITE
THE PICTURE AND THEN SEE IF
THE GUEST PASSAGE
.
YEAH, I'LL I'LL BE BUSY WRITING
THE PASSAGE FOR THE CHAIR BUT
WE WILL AND SAID DENHA
VOLUNTEER HOPEFULLY VOLUNTEER
TO WRITE THE OTHER PASSAGE.
YOU KNOW YOU CAN ALWAYS LOOK AT
PAST YEARS IT'S NOT TOO BIG
OF A TOO BIG DEAL JUST A
PARAGRAPH OR SO ABOUT THOUGHTS
AND PROGRESS MADE ON THE
PREVIOUS YEAR.
BUT THERE THERE'S A VOLUNTEER
IF WE HAVE ALL OF OUR WE DO
HAVE ONE OR TWO COMMISSIONERS
OUT TONIGHT.
RIGHT.
BUT NOW I THINK PRIVY MIGHT BE
A LITTLE TOO I MEAN LAST MONTH
I THINK WAS OUR FIRST MEETING
SO MAYBE
SO I WILL OPEN IT UP
TO VOLUNTEERS IF NOT, THEN WHAT
DO YOU USUALLY DO FOR WHAT IT'S
WORTH?
I MEAN WE DON'T HAVE TO HAVE
THAT GUEST PASS PASSAGE.
IT'S REALLY JUST YOU KNOW, IT'S
AN OPPORTUNITY TO GIVE ANOTHER
COMMISSION MEMBER A VOICE IN A
DIFFERENT FORMAT IF FOLKS
AREN'T INTERESTED, IT'S NOT ANY
SWEAT OFF OUR BACK TO JUST KIND
OF ELIMINATE THAT PART OF THE
REPORT.
IT'S NOT HARD BUT WE ALSO DON'T
WANT TO NOT OFFER THE
OPPORTUNITY IF SOMEBODY WANTS
TO.
>> SO WE'RE AMBIVALENT ON THE
MATTER.
>> IT'S REALLY WHAT THE
PLEASURE OF THE COMMISSIONS OR
IF ANYONE WANTS TO VOLUNTEER OR
ANY TIME JUST EMAIL OR SEND AN
EMAIL OR PROBABLY ANY TIME
BEFORE THE JANUARY MEETING.
JUST LET US KNOW.
>> DID YOU WANT TO YEAH.
LET'S GO AHEAD AND TAKE THE
PICTURE IF WE CAN WHILE I'M
THINKING ABOUT IT.
SO IN JUST A MOMENT OR SO I'M
GOING TO A COUNT DOWN TO THREE
OR COUNT DOWN TO ONE FROM THREE
AND IF YOU ALL COULD SMILE THAT
WOULD BE GREATLY APPRECIATE IT.
>> SO MAKE SURE I HAVE THE
RIGHT BUTTONS LINED UP AND
LOOKING AT THE CAMERA.
ALL RIGHT.
THREE, TWO, ONE CHEESE.
SEE IF THAT WENT.
ALL RIGHT.
>> NO, IT DID NOT CAPTURE THE
SEE IF THAT WENT.
WRONG SCREEN I REQUESTED
>> NO, IT DID NOT CAPTURE THE
BECAUSE I WAS IN THE DOCUMENT
WRONG SCREEN I REQUESTED
THAT I WAS GOING TO PASTE SO
BECAUSE I WAS IN THE DOCUMENT
THAT'S ALL RIGHT.
THAT I WAS GOING TO PASTE SO
>> LET'S TRY THAT AGAIN.
THAT'S ALL RIGHT.
THREE, TWO, ONE CHEESE.
>> LET'S TRY THAT AGAIN.
AH.
THREE, TWO, ONE CHEESE.
>> LOOKING AT THAT THERE IS A
AH.
GOOD LOOKING GROUP.
>> LOOKING AT THAT THERE IS A
THANK YOU ALL.
GOOD LOOKING GROUP.
THAT'S ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU ALL.
GOOD.
THAT'S ALL RIGHT.
ALL RIGHT.
GOOD.
SO GOOD MOVE ON FROM THAT
ALL RIGHT.
NAREMBEEN.
SO GOOD MOVE ON FROM THAT
YES.
NAREMBEEN.
THANK YOU.
YES.
ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU.
UP NEXT STEP REPORT UPDATES
ALL RIGHT.
RAYMONDE.
UP NEXT STEP REPORT UPDATES
SO WE RECEIVED A STAFF REPORT
RAYMONDE.
WRITING PROJECT UPDATES
SO WE RECEIVED A STAFF REPORT
RAYMONDE IF YOU WANT REVIEW
WRITING PROJECT UPDATES
THAT AND ANSWER ANY QUESTIONS
RAYMONDE IF YOU WANT REVIEW
THAT WE MIGHT HAVE
.
ALL RIGHT.
AS IS TYPICAL, I'LL JUST WALK
THROUGH THE CHANGES FROM LAST
MONTH TO THIS MONTH
STREET
RESURFACING NOT A LOT OF CHANGE
HERE BUT WE'RE TEEING UP THE
TWENTY TWENTY FOUR STUFF SO
YOU'LL START TO SEE SOME NEW
INFORMATION POPULATING IN THAT
SPACE SIDEWALK GAPS.
THE BIGGEST THING TO NOTE HERE
IS THAT THE ELSWORTH ROAD
PROJECT DIDN'T QUITE GET IN.
SO THERE IS A REMAINING GAP
THAT'S EXPECTED TO BE COMPLETED
IN THE EARLY PART OF TWENTY
TWENTY FOUR.
OTHER THAN THAT, ALL THE
SIDEWALK GAPS WERE COMPLETED
EARHART'S CONSTRUCTION IS NOW
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETE EXCEPT
THAT THE PAVEMENT MARKINGS ARE
TEMPORARY AND THE VERTICAL
ELEMENTS AND DELINEATOR ARE NOT
ALL IN YET EITHER.
IT'S ALWAYS KIND OF A SCRAMBLE
BEFORE THE WEATHER TURNS TO BAD
BETWEEN RAIN AND COLD WEATHER
ABOUT WHETHER THEY CAN GET A
PERMANENT PAINT PERMANENT
PAVEMENT MARKINGS DOWN AND THEY
COULDN'T GET THEM ALL IN SO DO
EXPECT THEM TO BE BACK OUT
MOBILIZING IN THE SPRING TO
FINALIZE ALL THAT BROOK STREET
CONSTRUCTION SUBSTANTIALLY
COMPLETES ITS MEDICAL CENTER
DRIVE NEXT.
>> YOU WANT ME TO TURN THIS ONE
OVER TO YOU
?
>> YEAH, SURE.
THERE'S NOT MUCH TO MENTION
OF OTHER THAN WHAT WAS ALREADY
SAID THERE.
WE DID THE REDESIGN OVER THE
COURSE OF THE PAST YEAR TO MEET
WORK WITH THE COUNCIL'S
RESOLUTION HAD HAD REQUESTED
THAT WE DO TO ADD THE
ADDITIONAL WIDTH ONTO THE
BRIDGE OR NOT MOTORIZED TRAFFIC
AND THAT WAS WHEN THE COUNCIL
JUST TWO DAYS TO GO ON MONDAY
AND THE CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT
WAS APPROVED AND AS IT SAYS, WE
PLAN TO BEGIN CONSTRUCTION IN
MARCH.
ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU, NICK MILLER AVENUE.
WE MENTIONED LAST MONTH THAT
THERE WAS ENGAGEMENT ON
OCTOBER 19TH FOR KIND OF THE
CAPITAL PORTION OF THE PROJECT.
ADDITIONAL ENGAGEMENT IS BEING
WORKED ON RIGHT NOW FOR THE
BICYCLE PEDESTRIAN ELEMENTS
OF THE PROJECT AND IT'S
EXPECTED TO OCCUR IN THE FIRST
QUARTER OF TWENTY TWENTY FOUR
MAYBE AS EARLY AS FEBRUARY.
SO WE'LL DEFINITELY KEEP YOU
POSTED ON THAT DOWNTOWN AREA
CIRCULATION STUDY IS GOING
STRONG STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENTS
AND OBVIOUSLY YOU GOT AN UPDATE
ON THE PROJECT LAST MONTH AS
WELL AS THE DEA.
THE STUDY IS KIND OF INCLUDING
ITS DISCOVERY PHASE AND
DEVELOPING SOME INITIAL
CONCEPTS WHICH WILL THEN BE
ROLLED OUT TO THE COMMUNITY AND
OTHER STAKEHOLDERS IN THE
SPRING.
>> TWENTY TWENTY FOUR THE STATE
TRUNK LINE TRANSFER.
STAY TUNED.
WE PLAN TO BRING THIS BACK TO
YOU NEXT MONTH WITH THE
FINDINGS THAT WE'RE CIRCULATING
THE FINAL REPORT NOW GETTING
COMMENT.
SO WE DO AND WE WILL PROBABLY
BRING THE CONSULTANT.
IT'S FAIRLY TECHNICAL IN NATURE
SO IF YOU HAVE QUESTIONS
THEY'RE BETTER SUITED TO ANSWER
SOME OF THOSE.
SO WE HAVE PROGRAMS ACCESSIBLE
PEDESTRIAN SIGNALS.
THE CITY IS CURRENTLY WORKING
ON AN ACCESSIBLE PEDESTRIAN
SIGNAL INSTALLATION AND
OBVIOUSLY EISENHOWER AND
JACKSON HIGH INTERCHANGE WITH
EASTBOUND 990 FOR THE LATTER
BEING IN COORDINATION WITH MS.
THERE'RE SOME OTHER LOCATIONS
IN COORDINATION WITH THEM NOT
AS WELL.
OFFICE OF SUSTAINABILITY
INNOVATION.
SO YOU'VE BEEN GETTING SOME
UPDATES ON THE ELECTRIC VEHICLE
CHARGERS THAT WERE INSTALLED IN
THE PUBLIC RIGHT AWAY ON TO DTL
AND UTILITY POLES.
THESE ARE IN THE OLD FOURTH
DOWNTOWN AND THEY HAVE BEEN
ACTIVATED SINCE LAST MONTH.
IT'S THE FIRST OF ITS KIND IN
THE STATE DTES REPORTED SIX
HUNDRED AND THIRTY NINE
STREETLIGHTS THAT HAVE BEEN
REPAIRED SO FAR IN TWENTY
TWENTY THREE WHICH IS PROBABLY
THE LAST OF THE NUMBERS FOR THE
YEAR MAYBE A SLIGHT UPTICK
BEFORE THE END OF THE YEAR.
>> TRAFFIC COMING.
WE ARE FINALIZING KIND OF THIS
LATEST ROUND WHICH INCLUDES
BIRD MARELLA AND HENRY ALL
OF WHICH HAD THEIR SECOND
MEETINGS AND NOVEMBER.
ALL OF THOSE ARE NOW
TRANSITIONING TO FINAL POLLING
IF THEY'RE NOT ALREADY IN THAT
PROCESS READY.
>> AND I DID WANT TO HIGHLIGHT
THE FACT NOW THAT IT'S DECEMBER
AND WE KIND HAVE A GOOD FEEL
FOR WHAT WE ACCOMPLISHED FOR
THIS YEAR WE PROCESS NINE
PETITIONS WHICH IF YOU THINK
ABOUT IT IN THE PAST WE'VE ONLY
PROCESSED TWO OR THREE SO WE
DIDN'T QUITE HIT OUR TARGET
OF TEN BUT WE DEFINITELY GOT
CLOSER THAN WE HAVE IN THE PAST
.
WE FINISH CONSTRUCTION ON THREE
PROJECTS AS WELL AND DESPITE
ALL OF THIS GREAT WORK THERE'S
STILL A LOT OF WORK TO DO.
THERE'S STILL SIXTEEN PROJECTS
IN THE QUEUE.
IT SEEMS LIKE FOR EVERY
PETITION WE GET THROUGH ANOTHER
ONE COMES LINE AND AS A RESULT
OF ALL THE PETITIONS WE
PROCESS, DO YOU THINK ABOUT IT?
WE ARE NOW HAVE A SORT
OF BACKLOG OF CONSTRUCTION THAT
NEEDS TO OCCUR WHEN THE NEXT
YEAR'S BUDGET COMES INTO PLACE
SO WE'LL SEE HOW FAR WE CAN GET
IN PROCESSING PETITIONS NEXT
YEAR.
WE HOPE TO BUILD A LOT OF THOSE
PROJECTS NEXT YEAR WITH THE
BUDGET THAT SUPPORTED US.
STAY TUNED IN THAT SPACE
BECQUEREL AGAIN WE'VE REPORTED
ON THIS IN THE PAST.
WE STILL ARE WAITING FOR
REQUESTS OUTSIDE OF THE DENHA
AREA.
SO AGAIN, IF YOU KNOW OF ANYONE
WHO IS LOOKING FOR SOME BIKE
PARKING IN PUBLIC RIGHT AWAY
OUTSIDE OF DOWNTOWN, SEND THEM
OUR WAY AND WE CAN SEE IF WE
CAN ACCOMMODATE THAT REQUEST
SAFE STREETS AND ROADS FOR ALL
GRANTS.
AS I SAID EARLIER, WE ARE
HOPEFULLY IN THE FINAL STAGES
OF GETTING SIGNATURE FROM
FEDERAL HIGHWAY ON THE FINAL
AGREEMENT WHICH WILL ALLOW US
TO PROCEED WITH THE WORK.
WE'RE ALREADY TEEING UP SOME
OF THE WORK THAT WE WANT TO DO
WITH THIS FUNDING AND WE WANT
TO HIT THE GROUND RUNNING AS
SOON AS WE GET THAT APPROVAL.
SO WE'LL DEFINITELY COME BACK
AND GIVE YOU UPDATES ON THAT ON
A REGULAR BASIS
CARBON REDUCTION PROGRAM
GRANTS.
THIS IS ONE THAT I REALLY WANT
TO DRAW YOUR ATTENTION TO.
YOU MAY RECALL WE REPORTED ON
THIS IN THE PAST.
WE DID AT ONE POINT ALMOST TWO
MILLION DOLLARS IN
CARBON REDUCTION PROGRAM
FUNDING FROM THE SOUTHEAST
MICHIGAN COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS
OR SOME KOG GOES TO TWO
PROJECTS.
ONE IS THE WASHINGTON BIKE
BOULEVARD.
THAT'S A COUPLE OF YEARS YET
BUT A PROJECT THAT IS IN THIS
FISCAL YEAR IS TO CONVERT ALL
OF DTD STREETLIGHTS TO HIGHER
EFFICIENCY LIGHT EMITTING DIODE
OR LED LIGHTS.
MANY OF THEIR LIGHTS ARE STILL
HIGH PRESSURE SODIUM OR A MORE
INEFFICIENT FIXTURE.
SO BUT WE WANT TO MAKE SURE WE
GET IT RIGHT SO WE HAVE TO
PILOT LOCATIONS.
ONE IS OFF OF EAST PACARD NEAR
EASY STREET AND THE OTHER IS
OFF OF LIBERTY AND EBRIGHT AND
SO WE ACTUALLY HAVE A SURVEY
RIGHT NOW THAT PEOPLE CAN GO
OUT, LOOK AT THE LIGHTS, GIVE
US THEIR IMPRESSIONS.
THERE ARE DIFFERENT LIGHTS BOTH
IN TERMS OF WATTAGE AND COLOR
TEMPERATURE.
WHEN I TALK ABOUT COLOR
TEMPERATURE I MEAN KIND OF THE
THE WHITENESS OR SOFTNESS
OF THE LIGHT LOWER COLOR
TEMPERATURE TENDS TO BE A
SOFTER YELLOWER LIGHT KIND
OF LIKE THE HIGH PRESSURE SODIS
AND AMBER WHEREAS A HIGHER
COLOR TEMPERATURE IS LIKE THE
BRIGHT WHITE SORT OF LED LIKE
COMPACT FLUORESCENT HOSPITAL
FOR LACK OF A BETTER TERM.
>> SO WE ARE EXPECTING TO
EXTEND THIS ENGAGEMENT
OPPORTUNITY.
IT WAS ORIGINALLY SLATED TO
CLOSE THIS FRIDAY ON DECEMBER
TWENTY SECOND.
BUT WE WANT TO GIVE PEOPLE MORE
OPPORTUNITIES ESPECIALLY WITH
THE HOLIDAY SO WE EXPECT TO
EXTEND THAT THROUGH EARLY TO
MID JANUARY.
THERE IS A PROJECT WEBSITE
DEDICATED TO IT SO YOU CAN
CLICK ON THAT IN THE REPORT
THAT WILL TAKE YOU THERE AND
YEAH, IF YOU'RE INTERESTED IN
STREET LIGHTING PLEASE GO VISIT
THOSE SITES AND GIVE YOUR
FEEDBACK AND THEN EDUCATION
ENCOURAGEMENT.
WE CONTINUE OUR TEAM WORK ON
LUNCH AND LEARNS AGAIN YOU'VE
HEARD ME SAY THIS BEFORE IS TO
RELEASE TRYING TO
INSTITUTIONALIZE AND AND MAKE
PART OF PRACTICE OUR VISION
ZERO PLAN.
SO WE'RE HOLDING THESE INTERNAL
ONLINE SESSIONS WITH CITY
DEPARTMENTS TO TALK ABOUT WHAT
VISION ZERO IS AND WE'RE
WORKING THROUGH A SERIES
OF MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC THAT
WE HOPE TO DO IN THE NEW YEAR.
>> AND AS YOU CAN SEE THERE IS
YOU NEED YOUR SECRET DECODER
RING TO GET THROUGH THE LAST
PART OF THIS REPORT BUT I DON'T
KNOW WHAT HAPPENED THERE SO
YEAH, THE LAST SENTENCE IS
SUPPOSED TO SAY THE MICHIGAN
ASSOCIATION PLANNING IS HOSTING
THEIR ANNUAL TRANSPORTATION
BONANZA IN FEBRUARY IN BATH
TOWNSHIP WHICH I THINK IS
OUTSIDE OF LANSING.
AND SUZANNE FLOWERS WILL
PRESENT ON OUR QUICK PROJECTS
AND INITIATIVES.
SO THAT'S WHAT THIS JIBBERISH
IS AND I APOLOGIZE FOR THAT.
>> I DON'T KNOW WHAT HAPPENED
THERE.
ALL RIGHT.
THERE IS ALSO ME JUST SHARE MY
SCREEN AGAIN SINCE ESPECIALLY
SINCE WE HAVE A COUPLE
OF MINUTES STILL THERE IS THE
OCTOBER THE CRASH REPORT
PROVIDED POLICE DEPARTMENT.
YOU HAVE THE PEDESTRIAN CRASHES
ON THE FIRST PAGE AND THEN THE
BICYCLE CRASHES ON THE SECOND
PAGE NOTING THAT THERE WAS A
SERIOUS LEVEL CRASH AT JACKSON
AND BURWOOD AS A REMINDER A
INDICATES A SERIOUS INJURY
CRASH.
SO DID ONE DRAW YOUR ATTENTION
TO THAT?
I THINK THE OTHER REPORT FOR
NOVEMBER JUST DROPPED ON MONDAY
SO I DIDN'T READ THAT OVER INTO
THIS PACKET BUT IT WILL FOR THE
NOVEMBER FOR THE JANUARY TICKET
.
ALL RIGHT.
AND WITH THAT I AM DONE AND I'M
HAPPY TO ANSWER ANY QUESTIONS
MY PETER, I GUESS I WOULD LIKE
TO DRAW YOUR ATTENTION TO A
STATEMENT ON MILLER AVENUE.
I THINK THAT I AGREE WITH WHAT
IT SAID.
I THINK THAT IT REALLY
SUMMARIZES THE CONCERNS THAT A
LOT OF US HAVE ABOUT THE TWO
WAY CYCLE TRACK ON MILLER.
IF YOU GUYS AREN'T AWARE OF IT,
I URGE YOU TO CHECK IT OUT BUT
THAT THE HEART OF IT THEY'RE
WORRIED ABOUT I GUESS WE COULD
DESCRIBE AS CONTRAFLOW TRAFFIC
SO WE'D HAVE THE BICYCLE'S
GOING AGAINST THE THE FLOW
OF TRAFFIC ON THAT SIDE OF THE
VEHICLE TRAFFIC ON THAT SIDE
OF THE ROAD.
THEY ALSO
BROUGHT UP THE POINT
OF HIGH SPEED DOWNHILL BIKES
AND LOW SPEED WOBBLY UPHILL
BIKES BEING POTENTIAL FOR BIKE
TO BIKE CRASHES.
SO THOSE ARE TWO TWO VERY GOOD
POINTS THAT I THINK WE NEED TO
TAKE INTO CONSIDERATION AND
PERHAPS CONSIDER SOMETHING
DIFFERENT FOR MILLER.
>> YEAH, I ASSUME THIS PROJECT
WILL BE COMING TO THE
COMMISSION AT SOME POINT THIS
NEXT YEAR.
YOU GUYS GO THROUGH THE PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT SESSIONS AND
HOPEFULLY WE'LL BRING IT TO US
AND THEN I CAN FORWARD ALONG
THE LETTER THAT PETE IS
REFERRING TO HAPPY IF YOU
HAVEN'T SEEN YET
ONE OF THE
QUESTIONS ON THE PROJECT UPDATE
SHEET THE SEEKING PUBLIC
OPINION ON THE LIGHTING AT THE
TWO PILOT LOCATIONS I GUESS IS
THERE NOT LIKE A SAFETY
STANDARD FOR FOR ROAD LOADING
AND CROSSWALK LIGHTING IN TERMS
OF COLOR, TEMPERATURE AND
INTENSITY AND THAT KIND THING?
I MEAN IS THERE SOMETHING WHERE
YOU KNOW, I WOULD ASSUME WE'RE
NOT GOING TO BE LIKE LISTENING
TO PEOPLE BEING OH I THINK IT'S
A LOT MORE CALM IF THERE ISN'T
ANY LIGHTING IT ALL GETS MY
EYES IN I MEAN RIGHT.
LIKE I ASSUME SAFETY WILL
OVERRIDE PREFERENCE PERSONAL
PREFERENCE ON THIS OR.
>> WELL I THINK THERE ARE TWO
SEPARATE ISSUES.
I THINK THE FIRST IS WHEN WE
ARE LOOKING TO ESTABLISH
ESPECIALLY POSITIVE CONTRAST
LIGHTING AT THE URTEXT USE THAT
TERM BEFORE ABOUT CROSSWALKS
THIS STANDARD LIGHTING IS NOT
REALLY SPEAKING TO THAT.
WE WILL STILL PROBABLY HAVE A A
BRIGHTER LIGHT FOR THAT
POSITIVE CONTRAST LIGHTING.
THIS IS REALLY TALKING ABOUT.
AND JUST TO GIVE YOU A SENSE
OF SCALE, WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
ROUGHLY FIVE THOUSAND DTT OWNED
AND OPERATED HIGH PRESSURE
SODIUM LIGHTS.
SO THESE ARE THE LIGHTS IN YOUR
NEIGHBORHOOD THESE LIGHTS ALONG
ARTERIALS.
THESE ARE LIGHTS ALL ACROSS THE
CITY.
A SMALL PORTION OF THOSE ARE
LEADA OR I'M SORRY A SMALL
PORTION OF CROSSWALK LIGHTING
AND LIKE I SAID WILL WILL
GRAVITATE TOWARDS SOMETHING
THAT WE FEEL ACHIEVES THAT
SAFETY OUTCOME.
SO WHAT IT IS IS WE'RE TRYING
TO WE GET A LOT OF INPUT ON A
LOT OF TOPICS SO SOME FOLKS
LIKE BRIGHTER LIGHTS, SOME
PEOPLE LIKE DIMMER LIGHTS, DARK
SKIES, COMPLIANCE, THINGS LIKE
THAT.
AND SO THAT'S WHY WE ARE
TESTING IT'S ULTIMATELY FOR
DIFFERENT STYLES OF LIGHTS.
THERE ARE TWO DIFFERENT
WATTAGES AT TWO DIFFERENT COLOR
TEMPERATURES AND SO WHAT WE'RE
TRYING TO DO IS JUST SEE IF
THERE ARE STRONG PREFERENCES IN
THAT SPACE.
SO THEN THAT WAY IT'LL HELP
INFORM THE DECISION THAT I
THINK THAT REALLY CLEARS UP.
THAT WAS I WASN'T SURE IF THIS
WAS FOR CROSSWALKS AND
INTERSECTIONS.
OK, VERY GOOD.
OTHER QUESTIONS COMMENTS.
RIGHT.
LIAISON REPORTS ANY
COMMISSIONERS WHO SPECIFICALLY
SERVE AS EARLY AS ON TO ANOTHER
BODY OR ORGANIZATION IF YOU
WOULD LIKE TO PROVIDE A BRIEF
REPORT OR UPDATE NOW AT THIS
TIME, YES, ONE JUROR THINKS THE
PLANNING COMMISSION RECOMMENDED
FOR A REVISION TO THE UNIFIED
DEVELOPMENT CODE LAST NIGHT AT
SCHOOL THE CITY COUNCIL.
BUT IT IS TO UPDATE THE
STANDARDS FOR REVIEWING A SITE
PLAN FROM THE TWENTY TEN I T
IT'S LIKE THE INSTITUTE
OF TRANSPORTATION ENGINEER
STANDARDS FOR TRAFFIC IMPACT
STUDY TO THE TWENTY TWENTY
THREE CITY STANDARDS FOR
MULTI-MODAL TRANSPORTATION
IMPACT ANALYSIS.
SO WHAT THAT EFFECTIVELY DOES
IS INSTEAD USED TO BE THAT IF
DEVELOPMENT CREATES FIFTY TRIPS
AT PEAK DEMAND TIME YOU'RE
REQUIRED TO A TRAFFIC IMPACT
STUDY BUT IS MOSTLY MORE ABOUT
CARS.
WHAT THIS DOES IS IT REQUIRES
DEVELOPERS TO RUN A
TRANSPORTATION AND IMPACT
ANALYSIS THAT LOOKS AT SIDEWALK
APPS ADA ACCESS BUS STOPS JUST
THOSE KINDS OF UPDATING
EVERYTHING TO THE TWENTY TWENTY
THREE TRANSPORTATION IMPACT
ANALYSIS STANDARD.
SO IT WAS KIND OF PRACTICE THAT
OUR PLANNERS WERE ASKING
DEVELOPERS TO DO THIS ANYWAYS.
BUT I JUST WANTED TO MAKE YOU
AWARE THAT WE ARE IN THE
PROCESS OF UPDATING OUR UNIFIED
DEVELOPMENT CODE TO COME UP TO
THAT LATEST MORE I GUESS
ACCEPTED STANDARD OF LOOKING AT
KIND OF THE HOLISTIC IMPACTS
OF DEVELOPMENT ON
TRANSPORTATION, ON MULTIMODAL
TRANSPORTATION AS OPPOSED TO
JUST THE TRAFFIC IMPACT
ANALYSIS.
SO JUST WANTED TO GIVE YOU A
HEADS UP THAT WE ARE TRYING TO
ALIGN OUR DEVELOPMENT CODE TO
LOOK AT KIND OF THAT MULTIMODAL
TRANSPORTATION ANALYSIS AND
THAT THAT IS GOING TO PROBABLY
COUNCIL I DON'T KNOW, TWO OR
THREE MONTHS.
I KNOW THE PLANNING STAFF IS
LIKE SUPER UNDERSTAFFED RIGHT
NOW.
SO ANYWAYS, JUST WANTED TO GIVE
YOU A HEADS UP SEEMS LIKE THIS
EITE TWENTY TWENTY THREE
STANDARD GETS UPDATED WHEN
THERE ARE BIG SHIFTS IN THE WAY
TRANSPORTATION ENGINEERS THINK
ABOUT IMPACTS TO SYSTEMS SO
MAYBE WE WON'T SEE ANOTHER
IMPACT FOR LIKE ANOTHER TEN
YEARS BUT THEN WE JUST WANT TO
GIVE YOU GUYS A HEADS UP ON
THAT.
>> THANKS.
THAT'S GOOD NEWS .
AND THEN ONE OTHER THING WE DID
APPROVE THE SITE PLAN FOR THREE
THREE THREE E WILLIAMS THAT'S
CORE SPACES.
THAT'S THE ONE JUST DIRECTLY
SOUTH OF LIBRARY LANE.
I THINK THAT'S LIKE I THINK
SIXTEEN STORIES RIGHT.
ONLY FOR PARKING SPACES THEY
ARE GOING TO RELY ON MOSTLY THE
LIBRARY LANE PARKING DECK.
IT IS GOING TO TAKE AWAY THE
TEMPORARY OR LIKE SHORT TERM
PARKING SPACES.
THINK WHEN YOU'RE AT THE PUBLIC
LIBRARY JUST TO THE NORTH THAT
KIND OF LIKE LATERAL STREET
THAT CONNECTS SECOND DIVISION I
THINK ABOUT FOUR OR FIVE
OF THOSE SPACES ARE GOING TO GO
AWAY.
BUT THE OVERALL CONSTRUCTION
PERIOD IS SLATED FOR Q2 NEXT
YEAR UNTIL MID TWENTY TWENTY
SIX.
WE DO THINK THIS PROJECT IS
MOVING FORWARD BUT THE
DEVELOPMENT THAT'S GOING TO
BRING I THINK SOMETHING LIKE
SIX HUNDRED THAT'S I THINK TWO
HUNDRED UNITS, 650 BEDS,
SOMETHING ALONG THOSE LINES
WITH FOUR PARKING SPOTS SO
ANYWAY I JUST WANTED TO GIVE
YOU A HEADS UP THAT THAT'S
COMING DOWN THE PIKE THAT NEEDS
TO AND WHERE THAT STANDS RIGHT
NOW IS THAT THE DEVELOPMENT
AGREEMENTS GO TO CITY COUNCIL
FOR APPROVAL SO IT'S NOT LIKE
DONE DONE YET BUT ALSO SO
ANYWAYS THE PARKING SPACE IS
JUST TO THE NORTH OF THAT SITE
.
>> THE CREDIT UNION IS GOING TO
BE IMPACTED.
SO WILL THERE BE ANY IMPACT ON
THE WILLIAM STREET BIKEWAY
WHETHER IT BE A CURB CUT OR
LOADING A YEAH, ACTUALLY GREAT
QUESTION.
>> WE TALKED ABOUT THAT LAST
NIGHT.
THEY'RE ACTUALLY REMOVING ONE
OF THE CURB CUTS AND WE DID
TALK ABOUT SOME THE SYSTEMS TO
PREVENT CARS.
WE WERE SPECIFICALLY TALKING
ABOUT LIKE AMAZON DELIVERY
VEHICLES OR LIKE GRUBHUB AND WE
WERE WORRIED THAT THEY'RE GOING
TO LIKE PARKING THAT BIKE LANE
BECAUSE THAT'S WHAT PEOPLE DO
FOR TWO OR THREE MINUTES OR
SOMETHING LIKE THAT.
BUT WHAT IS GOING TO HAPPEN IS
THAT IT'S STILL GOING TO BE
PROTECTED BUT THE REMOVAL
OF ONE ESSENTIALLY OF EXISTING
CONDITIONS.
BUT GOOD QUESTION WILL BE TO
TALK ABOUT THAT LAST NIGHT.
SO BUT ANYWAYS, I'VE BEEN
ANSWERING ANY QUESTIONS ABOUT
THAT BUT THOSE TWO ARE THE
THINGS THAT WE WENT OVER LAST
NIGHT.
>> ANYTHING TO REPORT ON
TUESDAY?
ONE IS THE PLYMOUTH ROAD
CORRIDOR TO SEE ONE NOW THAT
WENT THROUGH FIRST READING THAT
THAT'S PROBABLY DARMA BUT IT
WENT THROUGH FIRST READING THIS
PAST OR THAT IS MONDAY I
BELIEVE THERE WERE EIGHT
PROPERTIES THAT GOT MOVED TO BE
ON IT.
I SHOULD RECUSE MYSELF FROM
THAT BECAUSE ACTUALLY ONE
OF THE PROPERTIES THAT IS
PETITIONED IS TWENTY THREE
FIFTY GREENE ROAD WHICH OXFORD
MY EMPLOYER OWNS.
MY UNDERSTANDING IS THAT THOSE
EIGHT PROPERTIES THAT GOT ADDED
TO IT WERE REMOVED BECAUSE
OF INSUFFICIENT NOTICE SO WE
DIDN'T NOTICE IT PROPERLY.
BUT ASIDE FROM THOSE EIGHT THE
REMAINDER OF IT PASSED FIRST
READING SO IT'S NOT QUITE THERE
YET BUT WE'LL COME BACK FOR
SECOND READING AT THE NEXT
COUNCIL MEETING SO THAT YEP.
GOOD QUESTION.
THANKS.
THANK YOU.
ANY OTHER IDEAS ON REPORTS
THAT
RIGHT SAYING NONE.
LET'S MOVE ON TO COMMISSION
MEMBER COMMISSION MEMBER
COMMUNICATION SO ANY ONE THAT
WANTS TO PROVIDE ANY OTHER SORT
OF REPORT OR UPDATE.
YEAH PETER JUST PETER I CHECKED
OUT EISENHAUER LINEAR PARK FOR
WHATEVER REASON I'VE ACTUALLY
NEVER BEEN ON IT FOR HAVING
BEEN HERE FOR THIRTY YEARS BUT
THAT IS EXACTLY
ALSO LIKE
BASICALLY CONNECTING BUS STOPS
,ALLOWING PEOPLE TO GET EASIER
TO BE ABLE TO REALLY USE
MULTIMODAL TRANSIT.
>> THANK YOU FOR BRINGING THAT
UP SO I GLADLY GIVE YOU A TOUR
.
>> ANYTHING ELSE, PETER?
YEAH, I JUST I WANTED TO GO
BACK TO ONE OF THE FIRST THINGS
WE COVERED TODAY WHICH IS OUR
PUBLIC COMMENT ABOUT THE
CROSSWALK ON STADIUM AND WE ARE
DOING A GOOD JOB I THINK
OF CATALOGING SIDEWALK APPS AND
IT FEELS TO ME LIKE WE ALSO
NEED TO HAVE A BETTER PROCESS
FOR CATALOGING
CROSSWALK APPS
AND AFTER I SAW THE EMAIL THAT
WE SENT ON THIS TOPIC AND I
CHECKED THE DISTANCE BETWEEN
CROSSWALKS IN THAT AREA AND IT
IS IT IS PRETTY BIG AND IT'S
MUCH FURTHER THAN THE STRETCH
OF STADIUM THAT'S EAST
OF PACARD, FOR EXAMPLE.
THERE'S A COUPLE OF THEM THAT
ARE MUCH CLOSER AT CROSS
STREETS THERE.
SO I MEAN I AGREE THIS LOOKS
LIKE A PLACE WHERE WE NEED A
CROSSWALK BUT HOW DO WE HOW DO
WE GET THAT PRIORITIZED?
HOW DO WE GET IT ON THE LIST
AND HOW DO WE START CHIPPING
AWAY AT THAT LIST?
I THINK IT'S THE MAYBE A PLACE
WHERE WE CAN IMPROVE AND IS
THAT SOMETHING WE CAN ADD TO
OUR TWENTY TWENTY FOUR WORK
PLAN PERHAPS A A TOUCH UP
OF CROSSWALK DESIGN GUIDELINES
THAT INCLUDES THE STANDARD FOR
HOW FAR THERE SHOULD BE BETWEEN
I WOULD SAY AT A MINIMUM WE
SHOULD INCLUDE THAT TOPIC IN
OUR MARCH AGENDA TOPIC FOR FOR
THIS KIND OF THING.
I AGREE.
OK, THAT SOUNDS GREAT.
>> THANK YOU.
YEAH.
I WAS ALSO GOING TO COMMENT ON
THE PUBLIC COMMENTS.
I REALLY APPRECIATE APPRECIATED
CALLING IN.
THIS IS JUST BLOCKS FROM WHERE
WE'RE WHERE WE LIVE AND IT'S
SOMETHING THAT I THINK CAN BE
MADE IN EFFORT TO FIX IT.
BEFORE I EVEN BECAME
COMMISSIONER YEARS AGO BECAUSE
YOU KNOW, TO ME IT IT'S NOT
JUST THAT THERE'S A CROSSWALK
NEEDED BUT THERE'S AN ACTUAL
ENGINEERING PROBLEM I BELIEVE
BECAUSE THE SIDEWALKS FROM
FERNDALE AND IROQUOIS BOTH HAVE
ADA RAMPS THAT COME DOWN TO THE
STADIUM ROAD SURFACE.
THERE ARE RAMPS THAT GUIDE
PEOPLE FROM THE SIDEWALKS DOWN
ONTO THE STADIUM BOULEVARD BUT
THEN THERE'S NO CROSSWALK SO I
REALLY THINK THAT'S A PROBLEM
FOR VISION IMPAIRED PEOPLE OR
ANYONE THAT'S WALKING.
AND THERE'S HERE'S A RAMP RIGHT
DOWN ON THE STADIUM BOULEVARD
INVITING YOU RIGHT ONTO THE
ROAD.
BUT THEN THERE'S NO CROSSWALK.
SO I'VE ALWAYS THOUGHT THAT
THAT WAS A PROBLEM.
IT SEEMED LIKE MAYBE AT ONE
POINT WE THOUGHT WE WOULD
INSTALL ONE.
SO LET'S AT THE RAMPS IN PLACE
BUT THEN THE CROSSWALK WAS
NEVER INSTALLED.
SO I DO SEE THAT AS A PROBLEM
AND IT'S BEEN THAT WAY FOR
YEARS.
SO YEAH, I APPRECIATE THE
COMMENTS CALLING IN AND LIKE
PETER SAID, IT IS TRUE THAT ON
THE EAST SIDE OF PACARD THERE
ARE AT LEAST ONE TO RFD.
YOU KNOW THE ROAD I THINK IS
MAYBE A LITTLE BIT NARROWER TO
CROSS BUT IT'S A SIMILAR
CONFIGURATION TO THIS AREA
OF INTEREST AND SO IT SEEMS
LIKE WE COULD HAVE OUR FEES AND
CROSSWALKS ON THE EAST SIDE
OF PACARD THEN WE SHOULD BE
ABLE TO MAYBE DO IT IN THIS
LOCATION BETWEEN INDUSTRIAL AND
PACKARD AS WELL.
I JUST WANTED TO COMMENT IN
RESPONSE AND THANK YOU FOR THE
THE COMMENTS AND JUST GIVE MY
SUPPORT TO WHAT WAS SAID AS
WELL OR ANYONE ELSE CALL FOR
AGENDA ITEMS.
WE ALREADY REVIEWED THE
EXISTING WORK PLAN FOR THE YEAR
BUT IF THERE ARE ANY OTHER
AGENDA ITEM TOPICS PEOPLE HAVE
FOR MEETINGS IN THE NEAR FUTURE
,LET US KNOW IN OUR COURSE
ALWAYS FEEL FREE TO EMAIL ANY
OF US AT ANY TIME WE WILL WORK
TO GET THEM ON THE AGENDA.
>> SO LET'S REMIND YOU HAD SOME
THINGS YOU WANTED TO MENTION
FOR UPCOMING TOPICS.
>> WELL YOU'RE RIGHT.
WE DID TALK ABOUT THE WORK
PLAN.
I'LL RUN THROUGH THEM VERY
QUICKLY.
CHAIR AND VICE CHAIR ELECTIONS
THE ANNUAL REPORT POLICY AGENDA
INPUT TRAFFIC CALMING FOR BIRD
MAYBE SAFE STREETS FOR ALL
PROBABLY TRUNK LINE TRANSFER.
THOSE ARE THE THINGS WE'RE
LOOKING AT.
SO IT LOOKS LIKE IT'S PRETTY
FULL AGENDA ALREADY.
>> ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU.
ALL RIGHT.
SO THE NEXT MEETING WILL BE
HELD ON WEDNESDAY, JANUARY
17TH, TWO THOUSAND TWENTY FOUR
AT SEVEN P.M. IT WILL BE A
VIRTUAL MEETING LIKE THIS ONE.
SO IF THERE ARE NO OBJECTIONS
WE'LL OF GERMANY TO ADJOURN OUR
DECEMBER 20TH TWENTY TWENTY
THREE MEETING SEEING NO
OBJECTIONS.
>> THIS MEETING IS ADJOURNED.
THANK YOU.
THANK ON HAPPY NEW YEAR.
>> HAPPY HOLIDAYS EVERYBODY.